Returning to a time when inaugural addresses promised unity and hope, but few facts, the newly sworn-in President Joe Biden delivered a traditional speech at his inauguration that offered little for fact-checkers.
When he did offer us some facts to check, the 46th president of the United States largely hit his marks on domestic threats, COVID-19 and the Woman Suffrage Parade of 1913 in a 21-minute speech.
Domestic Threats
Biden, Jan. 20: And now, a rise in political extremism, white supremacy, domestic terrorism that we must confront and we will defeat.
Biden is correct about the rise in “political extremism.” Even before the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, the Department of Homeland Security warned in its Homeland Threat Assessment report, which was issued in October, about “an elevated threat environment” from political extremists.
“Some U.S.-based violent extremists have capitalized on increased social and political tensions in 2020, which will drive an elevated threat environment at least through early 2021,” the report said. “Violent extremists will continue to target individuals or institutions that represent symbols of their grievances, as well as grievances based on political affiliation or perceived policy positions.”
As for white supremacy, the Southern Poverty Law Center said in a February 2019 report that white nationalist groups increased by nearly 50% in a single year, “growing from 100 chapters in 2017 to 148 in 2018.”
The FBI, which releases annual data on hate crimes, reported 7,314 hate crime incidents involving 8,559 offenses in 2019 — up from 6,121 criminal incidents and 7,321 related offenses in 2016, when Biden was vice president. That’s an increase of 19.5% in hate crimes. In 2016, 46.3% of the known offenders were white, rising to 52.5% in 2019.
At a Sept. 17 hearing, FBI Director Christopher Wray said that “racially motivated violent extremism” is the largest share of domestic terrorism, and within that category those engaged in “some kind of white supremacist-type ideology is certainly the biggest chunk of that.”
The United States is not alone in grappling with white supremacy, which is spreading globally.
In a 2019 terrorism report, which was issued in June, the State Department said racially or ethnically motivated terrorism, or REMT, “in particular white supremacist terrorism, continues to be a threat to the global community, with violence both on the rise and spreading geographically, as white supremacist and nativist movements and individuals increasingly target immigrants; Jewish, Muslim, and other religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and/or intersex (LGBTI) individuals; governments; and other perceived enemies.”
COVID-19 Deaths
Biden, Jan. 20: It’s [COVID-19] taken as many lives in one year as America lost in all of World War II.
We’re quibbling, but Biden would have been on firmer ground had he said there have been more COVID-19 deaths than “battle deaths” from WWII.
According to the Johns Hopkins COVID-19 dashboard, updated at 12:21 p.m. on Jan. 20, around the time Biden made his remarks, the U.S. had 402,997 deaths from COVID-19 so far (there is some lag in reporting). According to the Department of Veterans Affairs, there were 291,557 battle deaths in World War II. There were another 113,842 deaths among service members not in theater. That comes to 405,399 total U.S. deaths in World War II. 
Sadly, given the average number of deaths from COVID-19 in recent days, Biden’s statement will likely be true by the end of the day.
Business Closures
Biden, Jan. 20: Millions of jobs have been lost. Hundreds of thousands of businesses closed.
As we’ve written, Biden does inherit an economy that has 9.8 million fewer jobs since the pre-pandemic recession peak in February. But the total number of businesses that have permanently closed due to the pandemic — as Biden’s remarks suggest — is currently unknown.
In September, Yelp, an advertising website and mobile app for local businesses, reported that a total of 163,735 businesses using its platform had closed during the pandemic, between March 1 and Aug. 31. About 60% of that total, or 97,966 closures, are believed to be permanent.
Yelp says its “closure counts are likely an estimate of the businesses most impacted, with many others not counted because they remain open with curtailed hours and staffing, or because they have not yet updated their Yelp business pages to reflect closures.” So the data could be an underestimate of the number of short- or long-term business closures.
That same month, economics professor Steven Hamilton — using earlier figures from Yelp and Womply, a data and software company for local businesses — estimated that 420,000 small businesses in the U.S. had closed permanently by July 10.
But at this point, an estimate is all it is. An official count is unavailable.
Women’s March
Biden, Jan. 20: Here we stand where 108 years ago at another inaugural thousands of protesters tried to block brave women marching for the right to vote. And today we mark the swearing in of the first woman in American history, elected to national office, Vice President Kamala Harris. Don’t tell me things can’t change.
Biden was referring to the Woman Suffrage Parade of 1913. On March 3, 1913, the day before President-elect Woodrow Wilson’s inauguration, more than 5,000 marchers paraded down Pennsylvania Avenue in support of women’s right to vote.
According to a Library of Congress essay on the event, “the crowds, mostly men in town for the following day’s inauguration of Woodrow Wilson, surged into the street making it almost impossible for the marchers to pass.” According to testimony later provided in a Senate hearing, “Women were jeered, tripped, grabbed, shoved, and many heard ‘indecent epithets’ and ‘barnyard conversation.’”
In all, 100 marchers were injured and taken to the hospital, and a troop of cavalry from Virginia was called in to control the crowd, according to the Library of Congress essay. Still, the essay notes, many of those in the parade completed the route, and the event provided the suffrage movement “an infusion of vigor.”
The 19th Amendment, granting women the right to vote, was ratified seven years later on Aug. 18, 1920. Since 1964, more women have voted in presidential elections than men.
Editor’s note: FactCheck.org does not accept advertising. We rely on grants and individual donations from people like you. Please consider a donation. Credit card donations may be made through our “Donate” page. If you prefer to give by check, send to: FactCheck.org, Annenberg Public Policy Center, 202 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Flanked by large signs proclaiming, “America leads the world in testing,” President Donald Trump said at a May 11 press conference, “we’ve prevailed on testing.” While the United States has done more total tests for COVID-19 than any other country, it doesn’t lead when testing is measured by other metrics.
At the same press briefing, Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, who is in charge of the government’s testing efforts, said: “No matter how you look at it, America is leading the world in testing.” Let’s take a look.
Total Number of Tests
As he has stated repeatedly, Trump touted the total number of tests conducted in the U.S. as being the most of any country in the world. “This week the United States will pass 10 million tests conducted, nearly double the number of any other country,” he said.
It’s true that the U.S. — by far — has conducted the most tests for COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, as measured in raw numbers. In the press conference, Giroir showed a graph, similar to the one below, by Our World in Data, a project based at the University of Oxford, that demonstrated this.

As of May 11, the U.S. had conducted 9.35 million tests. The country with the second-highest number was Russia, with 5.8 million tests, as of May 12.
We’d note that Our World in Data cautions comparisons of different countries may not be apples-to-apples. It notes: “[T]here are substantial differences across countries in terms of the units, whether or not all labs are included, the extent to which negative and pending tests are included and other aspects.” 
Per-Capita Tests
But the U.S. has a much larger population than most countries, which would make a per-capita comparison a better gauge of countries’ testing efforts. As we’ve explained before, testing a higher proportion of the population increases the ability to control the spread of COVID-19, making the per-capita metric an important one.
Both Trump and Giroir cited per-capita measures, but made misleading claims, leaving out countries that have done better than the U.S. in this regard.
“We’re testing more people per capita than South Korea, the United Kingdom, France, Japan, Sweden, Finland and many other countries, and in some cases combined,” Trump said.
After Giroir showed the graphic on total tests, he said: “If you look at per capita, everyone talks about South Korea being the standard, today we will have done more than twice their per capita rate of testing that was accomplished in South Korea. No matter how you look at it, America is leading the world in testing.”
But he didn’t show a per-capita graph such as the one below, which refutes the idea that the U.S. leads “no matter how you look at it.”

The U.S. was at 26.31 tests per 1,000 people as of May 9. That’s more than South Korea, but less than Iceland, Denmark, Italy, New Zealand, Switzerland, Austria, Australia, Canada, Belgium, Germany, Russia and Spain, among others. Worldometer, a data aggregation website, listed 39 countries and territories with higher per-capita testing rates than the U.S. as of May 12.
South Korea used to have a higher per-capita testing rate, when Trump first made misleading comparisons to the country in late March. It’s noteworthy that the U.S. did ramp up testing and, by April 17, surpass South Korea by this measure. But the two countries reported their first cases of COVID-19 around the same time, on Jan. 20 and 21. Yet South Korea began aggressively testing earlier than the U.S., as this graph shows. 

South Korea has been held up as an example, as Giroir mentioned, of how early testing can enable countries to identify and isolate cases, flattening the curve. While the U.S. is now doing more testing, the two countries are at different trajectories in the spread of the disease. Line graphs on the number of confirmed cases show the U.S. on a sharp curve up, beginning in late March, while South Korea’s cases spiked earlier, in late February and early March — and the number remained relatively flat through April.
Economic researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis noted in an April 22 paper that South Korea’s early testing “seems to have paid off,” while U.S. “inaction” resulted in more confirmed COVID-19 cases.
“Testing early and often seems to have paid off for South Korea,” the St. Louis Fed researchers wrote. “The weeks lost due to inaction in the United States during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in rationing of tests to those with severe symptoms. Thus, the United States had a large number of confirmed cases relative to South Korea.”
Tests Per Confirmed Case
Another way of comparing countries is by the number of tests each has performed per confirmed case. By this measure, the U.S. lags far behind most nations, according to Our World in Data.
The map below shows that the U.S., as of May 9, had done only about seven tests per confirmed case — far fewer than South Korea (61), Russia (28), Canada (16) and Japan (14), for example. (Note: The data is updated regularly, so use the slider to change the date to May 9.)

Jeffrey Shaman, an epidemiologist at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, told us for a previous story that per-capita test numbers are “not as informative as looking at testing per positive infection identified.” 
Comparing the U.S. to South Korea, for example, Shaman said, “They’re testing 10 times as many per infection found.”
We downloaded the data for May 9 and found that the U.S. ranked 59th out of 64 countries in tests per confirmed case as of that date.
In April, the Rockefeller Foundation issued a “testing action plan” that called for “rapidly expanding testing capacity to 30 million tests per week over the next six months” in the U.S.
CNBC, April 21: The Rockefeller plan says that more testing must be done to accurately capture the level of Covid-19 infections in the U.S.
“In Taiwan, there have been 132 tests conducted for every confirmed case. In Australia, the number is 62. In the United States, it is five,” an executive summary of the plan notes.
As of May 9, the U.S. has conducted about seven tests for every confirmed case, while Taiwan has conducted about 153.
We can also look at this measure in percentage terms: the test positivity rate, or the share of total tests that are positive.
As we wrote recently, if a high percentage of tests are positive, that suggests only the sickest patients are being tested and mild cases are likely being missed, a Johns Hopkins website explains. The World Health Organization has recommended that countries aim for about a 10% test positivity rate to make sure there’s enough testing being conducted to detect all cases. 
The U.S. is now at a 14.2% test positivity rate as of May 11. That’s not “leading the world” either.
The first COVID-19 vaccine to go into any American arms outside of a trial — and the first to be fully approved by the Food and Drug Administration — is Pfizer’s mRNA vaccine, which was designed and developed by the German biotech company BioNTech. Here, we give a rundown of basic facts about the vaccine and an overview of how it works.
Quick Summary
Vaccine name: BNT162b2, marketed as Comirnaty
Design type: mRNA
Dose number: 2, 21 days apart, with a third dose recommended for certain immunocompromised people. A third “booster” dose is also recommended for people 50 years of age and older and other groups at increased risk; all adults may receive one.
Efficacy: 91% efficacy in preventing symptomatic COVID-19 in people 16 years of age or older a week or more after receipt of the second dose.
Safety: No serious safety concerns reported other than some rare allergic reactions and a likely, but rare, association with heart inflammation. The shots routinely elicit a fairly strong temporary reaction in many people that can include injection site pain, fatigue, headache and chills.
Expected dose availability: Worldwide, up to 50 million doses, or enough for approximately 25 million people, by the end of 2020, with up to 1.3 billion doses expected in 2021.
Timeline: First doses were administered in December 2020 to prioritized populations, following the FDA’s emergency use authorization on Dec. 11.
Operation Warp Speed involvement: No support for the trials or research and development, but the U.S. government inked a $1.95 billion deal in July as part of OWS to buy 100 million doses. In December and February the U.S. announced agreements to purchase another 100 million doses each, for a total of 300 million doses to be delivered by the end of July 2021.
Storage considerations: Ultracold freezer temperatures of -80ºC to -60ºC (-112ºF to -76ºF) for long-term storage, with up to two weeks at standard freezer temperatures; after thawing, undiluted vaccine vials can be stored at refrigerator temperatures for up to a month. 
The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is the first COVID-19 vaccine authorized for use in the U.S. and the first to be fully approved by the FDA.  The companies released promising interim results from a phase 3 trial on Nov. 9, and on Nov. 18 announced an efficacy of 95% in preventing disease.
Two days later, the company submitted its application to the FDA to receive an emergency use authorization, or EUA, for its vaccine in people 16 years of age and older. The FDA conducted a thorough review — including an analysis of the raw data — of the vaccine’s safety and efficacy, and issued an EUA on Dec. 11.
A day prior to the FDA’s authorization, an outside panel of experts advising the agency also backed the vaccine in a 17 to 4 vote, with one abstention, that based on the evidence available, “the benefits of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine outweigh its risks for use in individuals 16 years of age and older.”
Based on additional clinical trial data from adolescents, the FDA amended its EUA for the vaccine on May 10 to include teens ages 12 to 15. The agency also revised the EUA on Aug. 12 to allow for third doses of the vaccine in certain immunocompromised people.
On Aug. 23, the FDA granted full approval to the vaccine for people 16 years of age and older. The vaccine remains available under emergency use to children as young as 12 and as a third dose to select immunocompromised people. A distinct pediatric version of the vaccine, with one-third as much mRNA, is authorized for children ages 5 through 11. For more on that vaccine, see “A Guide to Pfizer/BioNTech’s Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine for Kids 5-11.”
The FDA has also authorized third dose “boosters” for non-immunocompromised people. After initially restricting eligibility to people 65 years of age and older and adults at higher risk, the agency expanded booster access to all adults on Nov. 19. A CDC advisory committee concluded that anyone 50 years of age and older or with risk factors “should” receive one, while adults below 50 without risk factors “may” receive one.
“Streamlining the eligibility criteria and making booster doses available to all individuals 18 years of age and older will also help to eliminate confusion about who may receive a booster dose and ensure booster doses are available to all who may need one,” said Dr. Peter Marks, director of the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, in a press release announcing the expansion.
Pfizer/BioNTech Q&A
What is in the vaccine and how does it work?
As with most other COVID-19 vaccine designs, the Pfizer/BioNTech mRNA vaccine works by triggering an immune response against the spike protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which sits on the surface of the virus and is what the virus uses to enter cells.
The vaccine is made of modified messenger RNA, or mRNA, wrapped in a special blend of fatty molecules known as lipid nanoparticles. The mRNA provides instructions for cells to make their own spike proteins, prompting the body to generate protective antibodies and activate T cells. The lipids help deliver the RNA into cells and prevent it from being degraded too quickly.
As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has explained, there is no way to catch COVID-19 from this type of vaccine because the vaccine is not made of a virus. And because the mRNA from the vaccine doesn’t enter the nucleus — the part of the cell that houses DNA — it “does not affect or interact with a person’s DNA,” contrary to some online rumors.
How was the vaccine developed?
German company BioNTech designed multiple mRNA vaccine candidates after the genetic sequence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus became public in January 2020 and partnered with Pfizer in March 2020.
Early phase clinical trials showed that two leading mRNA designs triggered neutralizing antibody responses that were better than those from people recovering from natural COVID-19 infection, with no serious adverse events. 
But one candidate — BNT162b2, which prompts cells to make a full-length spike protein — did so with fewer side effects than the other. Based on the trial results and preclinical tests  in animals, the companies decided to move forward to a combined phase 2/3 randomized controlled trial testing two 30 microgram doses of BNT162b2 on volunteers.
The phase 2/3 trial began in late July 2020, ultimately enrolling around 46,000 people in the U.S., Argentina, Brazil, Germany, South Africa and Turkey. Enrollment was expanded past the 30,000 initial target in September 2020 to include people infected with HIV, hepatitis B and hepatitis C, and to add teens as young as 16 years old. In October 2020, the age requirement was lowered to 12 years old. Because of the limited data available on this population at the time of submission, however, Pfizer did not ask to include the 12- to 15-year-old age group in its original EUA request.
Pfizer is conducting additional studies in children below the age of 12.
How effective is the vaccine?
In the updated trial results reported to the FDA for full approval, the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine was 91% effective in preventing symptomatic disease at least a week after the second dose in people 16 years of age and older.
This does not mean that the vaccine works 91% of the time or that 9% of vaccinated people will fall ill with COVID-19. Instead, as Emory University biostatistician Natalie Dean and the World Health Organization have explained, the percentage refers to a relative reduction in risk, such that a vaccinated person is 91% less likely to get sick compared with an unvaccinated person.
In the updated analysis, which included around 20,000 participants each in the vaccine and placebo groups, there were 833 symptomatic COVID-19 cases in the placebo group and 77 in the vaccine group.
Pfizer previously reported an efficacy of 95% in preventing disease in people 16 years of age and older, based on 162 cases of symptomatic COVID-19 in the placebo group and eight in the vaccine group. It was this data that served as the basis of the FDA’s initial EUA for the vaccine in December 2020. 
According to the FDA’s summary explaining its approval decision, vaccine efficacy for the updated trial was similar across a variety of demographics, including gender, ethnic groups and those at high risk of severe COVID-19.
Protection against severe disease was also very high. Depending on the case definition for severe COVID-19, the vaccine was either 95% or 100% effective in the updated trial.
Vaccine efficacy, which is the metric measured in a randomized controlled trial, is different from vaccine effectiveness, which refers to the real-world performance of the vaccine, as measured in observational studies. Vaccines may not do quite as well in a wider population outside the idealized conditions of a trial.
Efficacy figures also only reflect the vaccine’s performance after a certain amount of time and against the type of virus circulating in the population at the time of testing. In the case of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, that did not include the highly contagious delta variant, but did include some locations where the beta variant was prevalent; the period of follow-up was up to around six months after receiving a second dose.
At the same time, observational studies used to estimate effectiveness are more prone to bias compared with randomized controlled trials.
Since the vaccine’s rollout, numerous observational studies have demonstrated the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine’s effectiveness in the real world, including against the delta variant, although there may be a decline in protection against infection and mild disease compared with previous viral variants. 
A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine in July, for example, found that the two-dose vaccine was 88.0% effective in preventing symptomatic disease with delta in the U.K., down from 93.7% against the previously dominant alpha variant.
Other studies from the U.S. also suggest a moderate decrease in the vaccine’s ability to prevent infection, either due to waning immunity over time, the delta variant or some combination of the two. 
In a study of New York residents, about half of whom were immunized with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, vaccine protection against infection fell from 92% to 75% between early May and late July. Another study of nursing home residents from across the U.S. found that the effectiveness of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine against infection declined from 74% in the pre-delta era to 53% with delta.
There is little sign, however, of a similar drop in protection against serious disease, hospitalization or death. In the New York study, vaccine protection against hospitalization remained at 90% or higher. Another evaluation, which pulled information from across 18 U.S. states, found the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines stayed 84% to 86% effective in preventing hospitalization for 24 weeks.
It remains unknown how long vaccine protection lasts. For some people who are immunocompromised, data suggest that two doses may be insufficient and those individuals might benefit from an additional dose.
For people who are healthy, Pfizer is conducting additional studies to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a third “booster” dose of its vaccine. In late August, the company announced positive results of giving a booster — an increase in neutralizing antibodies with similar side effects to the two-dose regimen.
In September, the FDA authorized a booster dose, given at least six months after the initial two-dose series, for the elderly and other populations at increased risk.
In October, Pfizer released clinical trial data showing a booster reduced the chance of falling ill with COVID-19 by 95.6% compared with those who were fully vaccinated but had not received a booster. The FDA expanded booster eligibility to all adults in mid-November.
Evidence suggests people vaccinated with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine who become infected with the coronavirus can pass it on to others, although they are less likely to do so compared with unvaccinated people.
How safe is the vaccine?
In clinical trials and in subsequent safety monitoring, the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine has been shown to be very safe. 
While many people experience unpleasant side effects, the vaccine only very rarely appears to cause more serious problems. 
This includes serious allergic reactions, such as anaphylaxis, and an increased risk of inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis) or its surrounding tissue (pericarditis). Both of these adverse events, while potentially dangerous, are uncommon and treatable.
Anaphylaxis refers to a life-threatening reaction that usually occurs within seconds or minutes of exposure to an allergic substance. All vaccination sites are equipped to deal with allergic reactions.
People getting the vaccine should be prepared for irksome side effects, including pain, redness and swelling at the site of injection, as well as fatigue, headache, muscle pain, chills, joint pain and fever.
According to the clinical trial data, these types of reactions were relatively common and tended to be more frequent and severe in younger people.
The only people the FDA says should not receive the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are those who have had a serious allergic reaction to a previous dose of the vaccine or one of its ingredients. The CDC advises not getting the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine if you have had any kind of immediate reaction, even if not severe, to a dose of the vaccine or one of its ingredients, such as polyethylene glycol.
The agency also recommends consulting with your physician if you have ever had an immediate allergic reaction to other vaccines or injectable therapies.
Data presented to the CDC advisory committee showed a rate of 5.0 cases of anaphylaxis per million doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, as of July 31, which is slightly higher than 1 to 2 per million instances that occur with other vaccines. The crude estimated frequency of anaphylaxis, as reported in the FDA’s summary accompanying the approval, is 6.0 cases per million doses.
In late June, the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices concluded there is a “likely association” between COVID-19 mRNA vaccination and myocarditis and pericarditis in teens and young adults.
As of Nov. 10, the agency says there have been 1,793 preliminary reports of either condition in people 12 through 29 years of age following immunization with any COVID-19 vaccine.
Health officials have emphasized that the potential vaccine-related myocarditis and pericarditis cases are rare and the benefits of vaccination still outweigh the risks. Early evidence, ACIP said, suggests these myocarditis cases are less severe than typical ones. The CDC has also noted that most patients who were treated “responded well to treatment and rest and quickly felt better.”
According to an FDA Q&A, the agency has concluded that the safety surveillance data “demonstrate increased risks” of myocarditis and pericarditis following vaccination with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine.
In its approval summary, the FDA said the reporting rates for confirmed cases of myocarditis or pericarditis are higher in males under the age of 40 and are highest in male teens 12 to 17 years of age, at approximately 65 cases per million doses administered. The conditions are also more common after the second dose and within a week of vaccination. “Although some cases of vaccine-associated myocarditis/pericarditis required intensive care support,” the FDA summary reads, “available data from short-term follow up suggest that most individuals have had resolution of symptoms with conservative management.”
The agency conducted its own benefit-risk assessment and concluded that even in a “worst-case” scenario, in which myocarditis and pericarditis cases were more frequent than currently observed, the vaccine was less effective than expected and COVID-19 transmission was low, the benefits of vaccination would outweigh the risks.
A study from Israel, published in the New England Journal of Medicine on Aug. 25, similarly identified vaccination with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine as being associated with an elevated risk of myocarditis, at the rate of 2.7 additional cases per 100,000 people. But that risk was still much lower than the risk of the same condition in people who contracted the coronavirus, which was at a rate of 11 additional cases per 100,000 people.
The FDA is requiring Pfizer to conduct six studies to better understand the risk of the inflammatory heart conditions after vaccination. The CDC is also conducting its own survey to investigate potential long-term effects.
Why does the vaccine need to be kept so cold?
The extreme cold is necessary to keep the highly sensitive lipid-encapsulated RNA molecules from degrading. Logistically, this cold chain requirement poses an extra hurdle in distributing the vaccine, since many potential vaccination sites lack the appropriate ultracold freezers and may not have a ready source of dry ice.
Pfizer has tried to mitigate some of these challenges by creating specialized “thermal shippers” for its vaccine that will maintain ultracold temperatures for up to 10 days if unopened and can store vials for as long as a month if refilled every five days with dry ice.
On Feb. 25, the FDA also began allowing the vaccines to be shipped or stored at regular freezer temperatures for up to two weeks, following data showing that the doses would remain stable under such conditions. In May, the agency extended the time undiluted vials could be kept in a refrigerator to a month, up from the original five days.
Rival company Moderna, which also used an mRNA design for its COVID-19 vaccine candidate, also requires freezing temperatures, but they are less severe, due to differences in the particular lipid nanoparticles used. The company announced in November that its vaccine should remain stable long-term at standard freezer temperatures and should last for 30 days in a refrigerator.
Editor’s note: This story will be updated as necessary.
Editor’s note: SciCheck’s COVID-19/Vaccination Project is made possible by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The foundation has no control over FactCheck.org’s editorial decisions, and the views expressed in our articles do not necessarily reflect the views of the foundation. The goal of the project is to increase exposure to accurate information about COVID-19 and vaccines, while decreasing the impact of misinformation.
Researchers use genomic sequencing — not the clinical tests used to diagnose patients with COVID-19 — to identify and track specific variants of the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, including the highly contagious delta variant. But viral posts try to deny the existence of the variant by misleadingly claiming there is “no ‘Delta Variant’ test.”

The delta variant of the novel coronavirus — now the dominant version of the virus in the U.S. — has presented additional challenges as the country tries to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. The highly contagious variant is responsible for a surge in outbreaks across the country, particularly in areas with low vaccination rates. Vaccines still protect against the variant, especially against serious illness and death, but may be less effective against delta compared to other forms of the virus.
Yet false and misleading claims have recently sought to not only cast doubt on the seriousness of the variant, but question its existence.

One such meme shared on Facebook more than 12,000 times misleadingly asks, “Since there is no ‘Delta Variant’ test, how exactly are people being diagnosed with the ‘Delta Variant’?”
The same question was presented in a July 26 tweet shared by thousands that was posted by Errol Webber, a film producer and Republican who unsuccessfully ran for Congress in California last year. Similar posts have been shared hundreds of times each.
Adding to the misperception, at a White House press briefing July 30, Emerald Robinson, a reporter for the conservative outlet Newsmax, asked, of the delta variant, “How do you test, when — that it’s the dominant strain in the area, when people just test whether they’re COVID positive?”
White House Principal Deputy Press Secretary Karine Jean-Pierre, seemingly perplexed, said “we don’t test it” and that “we listen to public health and scientists, and they tell us that it’s the Delta variant.”
On Twitter, Robinson — who has nearly 400,000 followers — has since misleadingly claimed that “the Biden Administration is unable to provide any proof that Delta variant is real” and later that the administration “has no idea how to test for the Delta variant.”
But the various posts trying to cast doubt on the validity of the delta variant betray a lack of understanding of how variants are being identified and tracked. There is testing to identify delta and other variants, but it’s more sophisticated than the routine clinical testing — often by polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, tests — used to simply determine whether someone has COVID-19.
Dr. Benjamin Pinsky, an associate professor of pathology and medicine at Stanford University, told us in a phone interview that it’s worth first noting that “all the diagnostic tests are capable of detecting the delta variant — they just don’t distinguish it from different lineages.” In other words, the PCR tests do detect the delta variant as SARS-CoV-2.
Identifying and tracking specific variants, however, requires additional analysis.

To do that, scientists use a process called genomic sequencing. As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention explains, sequencing is a way to decode the genes of a virus to better understand factors such as its spread and evolution.
John Everett, who helps conducts such research at Penn Medicine to understand the virus’ presence in the Delaware Valley, explained it this way: “Research institutions, including Penn, study samples collected from the community by sequencing viral genomes in those samples. We identify mutations in the genomes, compared to the original Wuhan strain, where groupings of specific mutations are used to define viral variants or lineages.”
“We track the relative rise and fall of different lineages which we can break apart by zip code to build a picture of how the different lineages are spreading in our area,” Everett, the bioinformatics director for the University of Pennsylvania lab group behind the research, told us by email.
The group’s data show how the delta variant has rapidly become the main lineage identified in most samples tested from the University of Pennsylvania Health System.
Some findings done through PCR tests can provide insights into the suspected lineage present. For example, the alpha variant — first identified in the United Kingdom in September 2020 — caused PCR failures involving the virus’ S gene, which codes for the surface spike protein, because of the variant’s mutations.
The phenomenon of variants causing test issues is expected, Everett said, which is why PCR tests check against “multiple regions of the viral genome.” That’s “another reason why surveillance is important — to identify mutations in the community which may interfere with tests and adjust the tests as needed,” he said.
Dr. Marie-Louise Landry, director of the Clinical Virology Laboratory at Yale New Haven Hospital, noted that the S gene issue “was only suggestive of alpha” since it was only one of the characteristic mutations of alpha. Sequencing the whole genome, she told us by email, is still needed to confirm that it was indeed the alpha variant.
Pinsky, who is also medical director of the Clinical Virology Laboratory for Stanford Health Care, said his lab runs a second, different PCR test on samples that are positive for SARS-CoV-2 to look for specific mutations that are seen in variants of concern and variants of interest prior to sequencing.
For the delta variant, Pinsky said, what’s known as the L452R mutation is often a telling sign: About 94% of the samples analyzed by his lab that show that mutation are proven to be delta once sequenced, he said. Moreover, about 90% of all positive samples recently sequenced by his lab are delta, he said.
“Delta is certainly not a hoax,” Pinsky said.
And while some of the viral posts online suggest patients are being “diagnosed” with the delta variant, all the experts we consulted said that patients would not be typically informed of the lineage identified — though, in areas with predominantly delta transmission, patients may be able to make inferences.
Dr. Atul Butte noted to us in an email that sequencing analyses “are NOT clinical tests.”
“These sequences are used for public health tracking and epidemiology,” said Butte, a University of California, San Francisco pediatrics and epidemiology professor who also directs the university’s Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute. “We wouldn’t deliver any different medical care right now, based on whether one variant is present or another.”
Editor’s note: SciCheck’s COVID-19/Vaccination Project is made possible by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The foundation has no control over our editorial decisions, and the views expressed in our articles do not necessarily reflect the views of the foundation. The goal of the project is to increase exposure to accurate information about COVID-19 and vaccines, while decreasing the impact of misinformation.
In the first TV ads of the runoff campaign that could help decide the balance of the Senate, Republican Sen. David Perdue warned his opponent would “radically change America,” while Democratic challenger Jon Ossoff accused his opponent of downplaying the coronavirus.
The ad from Perdue makes the misleading claims that Ossoff would “defund police” and provide “voting rights for illegal immigrants.” Ossoff has repeatedly said he does not support defunding police. And while he supports providing a pathway to citizenship to some 11 million immigrants currently in the country illegally, he does not support voting rights for noncitizens.
Ossoff’s ad offers similar side-by-side comments from Perdue and President Donald Trump that the ad contends show Perdue “ignored the medical experts, downplayed the crisis and left us unprepared.”
We’ll leave it to readers to decide for themselves if Perdue’s comments did that, but some of the comments highlighted in the ad came early in the year at a time when medical experts were making similar comments. And Perdue made other comments warning about the seriousness of the virus and reinforcing Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommendations to reduce the spread of the virus.
Perdue’s Ad
The first TV ad of the runoff from the Perdue campaign begins with a clip of Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer celebrating after Joe Biden was projected the winner of the presidential race, telling a crowd in New York, “Now we take Georgia, then we change America.”

If Democrats were to flip the two Senate seats in Georgia’s January runoff elections — Perdue vs. Ossoff and Republican Sen. Kelly Loeffler vs. Democrat Raphael Warnock — Democrats would control both houses of Congress and the presidency.
“You heard him,” the ad’s narrator says. “Chuck Schumer is trying to use Georgia to take the Senate majority and radically change America. The Schumer, Pelosi, Ossoff change? Defund police. Voting rights for illegal immigrants. Washington, D.C. as the 51st state.”
That’s a distortion of Ossoff’s positions. Ossoff has repeatedly said he does not support defunding police.
For example, in a Sirius XM radio interview on Sept. 11, Ossoff said, “I oppose defunding the police and I think frankly, it’s a counterproductive and foolish way of characterizing what I think for some folks is a desire to reform police.”
In an interview on WSB radio on June 11, Ossoff reiterated, “No, the answer is not to defund police. The answer is to reform police. And the answer is to demilitarize police. Far too many local police departments are heavily equipped with armored vehicles and military equipment, and when all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail.”
The Perdue campaign points to comments Ossoff made in a radio interview in June: “You have to have national standards for the use of force, and yeah, you’ve got to be able to hold individual officers and entire departments accountable, and there also has to be funding for those departments on the line.” (Starting at the 19:39 mark.)
The Ossoff campaign says that Ossoff was talking about supplemental police funding, and that Ossoff’s position is similar to that of Biden, who in June told CBS News, “No, I don’t support defunding the police. I support conditioning federal aid to police, based on whether or not they meet certain basic standards of decency and honorableness. And, in fact, are able to demonstrate they can protect the community and everybody in the community.”
As we have written, there is no agreed upon definition for the term “defund the police.” Some police critics, who believe there is systemic racism in law enforcement, really do want to abolish police forces and replace them with other forms of community safety entities. Others advocate shifting some money and functions away from police departments to social service agencies.
Ossoff told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution in August that he agrees with Biden’s position of tying federal funds for law enforcement agencies to meeting certain standards, including whether they can “demonstrate they can protect the community.”
The ad also distorts Ossoff’s position when it says he supports “voting rights for illegal immigrants.” Ossoff’s campaign told us he does not, and the Perdue campaign didn’t provide any evidence that he does.
The Perdue campaign points to Biden’s support for “providing a roadmap to citizenship for nearly 11 million undocumented immigrants” currently in the U.S., including the so-called Dreamers who arrived in the U.S. illegally as children. A bipartisan immigration bill that sought to do the same thing passed the Senate in 2013 with the support of 14 Republicans, including Sens. Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio, who co-sponsored the bill. Ossoff’s policy similarly calls for creating “a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants who are already here and otherwise follow the law.”
But that’s different from allowing “voting rights for illegal immigrants.” As we have written, it would likely take more than a dozen years under such legislation for immigrants to gain full citizenship, and voting rights. But they would then be citizens, not “illegal immigrants.” Ossoff’s campaign says he opposes voting rights for noncitizens.
The ad is correct that Ossoff supports statehood for Washington, D.C., but it’s not clear that statehood for D.C. could be accomplished even with a simple majority in the Senate. Under Senate rules, legislation can be blocked if it fails to receive the 60 votes necessary to end debate and move to a vote.
“Any effort to get DC statehood would be filibustered,” Norm Ornstein, a congressional expert at the American Enterprise Institute, told us via email. “So the answer is that it would first require a change in the rules of the Senate to reform or end the filibuster, which is not going to happen with only 50 Democrats — at least not for some time. It could happen, if [Senate Majority Leader Mitch] McConnell’s Republicans used the filibuster to block everything — including COVID relief, infrastructure, and every other Biden initiative. But not for quite a while, and no sure thing at all.”
Ossoff’s Ad
The latest ad from the Ossoff campaign mirrors one it has been running since the summer, accusing Perdue of downplaying the coronavirus crisis. The runoff ad, called “Echo,” is updated to pair similar quotes from Perdue and Trump to make the case that Perdue “ignored the medical experts, downplayed the crisis and left us unprepared.”

We’ll just focus on the quotes attributed to Perdue. The quotes are accurate; however, they are misleadingly juxtaposed with a chart showing the rising COVID-19 death count. Some of Perdue’s comments were made early in the pandemic, long before the corresponding number of deaths reached the levels shown in the ad.
The first two quotes come from an interview Perdue did with The Valley’s Morning News podcast — a Georgia program  — on March 11. The bolded parts of the interview are included in the ad.
Perdue, March 11: It’s a balance between being precautionary and overreacting. And I think we have to realize that the risk of this virus in the United States right now still remains low. And the mortality rate is still being determined. The normal mortality rate of the normal flu is well under 1%. This so far is over 1%, but you know, so far, very, very few people have been exposed to it in the United States. […] So I think we’re doing what we should do right now. I don’t want to see America panic and overreact. But I do think it’s good for us to be precautionary and just take care of ourselves relative to whether we think we’re getting sick or have been exposed or anything like that.
Perdue went on to say that “the authorities are not taking this lightly. We’re presuming the worst and preparing for the worst. But at the same time, we’re hopeful this thing will burn itself out before we see a dramatic increase in the numbers here.”
The Perdue campaign also noted that in this interview, Perdue reiterated CDC guidance: “If you’re elderly or have a respiratory illness, be discretionary and stay away from large crowds. Use hand sanitizers, wash your hands frequently, try to stay away from people who are sick. And if you are sick, stay home. And if it feels like it’s getting serious, call a doctor, don’t go run to the emergency room right away but call a physician and get advice.”
To put these comments in the context of the moment, the day before the interview, there were about 1,500 COVID-19 cases in the U.S., with about 37 deaths, according to the COVID Tracking Project. At that time, the New York Times reported 17 cases in Georgia, and no deaths.
In comments on Feb. 29, less than two weeks before Perdue’s interview, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said in an interview on NBC’s “Today” show that the risk from COVID-19 “is still low,” and he said there was no need for people to change their daily routines “at this moment.” But he warned that could change if “you start to see community spread.” Fauci said the virus could develop into a “major outbreak” or “it could be something that’s reasonably well controlled.”
On March 9, just two days before Perdue’s comments, Fauci was still talking about the coronavirus as “an evolving thing” and that holding campaign rallies “in a place where there is no community spread, I think the judgment to have it might be a good judgment.”
Things changed quickly though in the days after Perdue made those comments on March 11. The day of that interview, the World Health Organization declared the global outbreak a pandemic, and two days later, Trump announced a national emergency.


The ad then highlights a comment Perdue made at a Chamber of Commerce meeting on May 14: “We’ve had ordinary flu seasons with more deaths.” Perdue rightly noted that there were about 80,000 deaths from COVID-19 at that time, and there were an estimated 61,000 influenza deaths in the 2017-2018 flu season (though the average over the last decade has been fewer than 40,000 per year). But even at the time it was a flawed comparison and, of course, COVID-19-related deaths continued to mount through the summer and fall (and now stand at more than 247,000). We have repeatedly fact-checked the president for making faulty comparisons between the flu and COVID-19, which has proven to be much more deadly (as medical experts repeatedly warned).
The ad then uses a quote from Perdue at a different Chamber of Commerce meeting on April 28: “The numbers projected were supposed to be much worse.” Perdue credited Trump’s actions for keeping those numbers down.
As we have written numerous times in the past when Trump claimed to have averted some 2 million deaths, a forecast of 2.2 million deaths in the U.S. is based on a model from Imperial College London in March that predicted U.S. deaths if no mitigation measures were taken and no individual behavior changes occurred. The figure, therefore, was not intended to be an estimate of likely deaths.
And as we have written, research does support the idea that lockdowns — which were instituted by states, not Trump — saved lives earlier this year, although it’s hard to say how many. 
Finally, the ad uses a clip from Perdue being interviewed on CNBC on June 16 in which he was asked about the reopening plan in Georgia. “It’s going very well,” Perdue said.
Fauci and other medical experts were critical in May of Georgia and some other Republican-led states for opening too early. At the time, Perdue told Politico that he had recently eaten in restaurants twice in Georgia and, “We’ve got to get this economy open again. We’re on the back side of the cycle.” However, new cases spiked in Georgia in July and August.
Readers can make what they will of Perdue’s comments and decide for themselves if he downplayed the virus.
The Perdue campaign points to other comments and statements Perdue made around the same time that suggest he took the pandemic seriously and took measures to help protect the public.
For example, on March 2 after the first two cases of the coronavirus were reported in Georgia, Perdue and Loeffler issued a press release stating, in part, “We’re closely monitoring the cases of coronavirus in Georgia and urge everyone to take extra precautions. Governor Kemp and the Trump Administration are working with us to ensure we keep Georgians healthy and safe. It is of utmost importance that Georgia has the resources necessary to respond accordingly.”
And on March 23, Perdue released a public service announcement via video, which began: “First of all, I know this virus is causing a lot of concern, and rightfully so. Let me assure you of this: the world’s best public health officials are right here in Georgia at the CDC. They’re working around the clock to help contain this virus and to develop a vaccine.”



Perdue, March 23: The President’s early travel restrictions gave us time to prepare for the virus, and we’re continuing to take action to safeguard public health. We’re doing this by cutting red tape, partnering with the private sector to expand testing availability, and ensuring state and local officials have the resources they need. We’re also working on ways to help families and businesses that might be impacted financially.
Finally, please remember to follow the advice of public health officials: stay home if you are sick; wash your hands frequently with soap and water; keep a safe distance from others. If you are experiencing symptoms, call your health care provider right away. You don’t necessarily need to go there, just call them and give them your symptoms.

The Perdue campaign also pointed to a number of COVID-19-related actions Perdue has taken, including helping small businesses access the Paycheck Protection Program and helping to locate personal protective equipment for front-line workers.
The Perdue campaign also touted measures in the CARES Act, a nearly $2 trillion stimulus package to bolster the economy in response to the coronavirus pandemic. It included direct payments to Americans, loans for small businesses, support for hospitals and more. The bill passed unanimously in the Senate. Perdue, of course, voted for it, although he opposed two of its major provisions: the direct payment of $1,200 checks to qualifying individuals and the $600-per-week in additional unemployment payments.
One one front, Perdue has been out ahead of, and clearer than, the president: encouraging the public to wear masks.
Trump has waffled on his support for mask-wearing from the start — saying on April 3, the day the CDC issued recommendations for public mask-wearing, that he would not personally be wearing a mask. In an interview in early May, Perdue said that in Senate meetings the week before, “We all wore masks. We actually had a meeting before then (and) we had masks. And we have hand sanitizers, signs everywhere about washing hands and maintaining social distance. I think it’s very important that America sees that, that we are functioning, and that this is an essential part of life, that we work together.”
In an interview on Fox News on June 30, Perdue said, “I absolutely support wearing masks. We wear them here in the Senate. We’ve been back here for five weeks. We follow the protocols that the military and our essential workers have been following. We wash our hands, we use masks, and if we follow that, I believe the infection rate can be managed.”
And on July 9, Perdue tweeted a picture of himself wearing a mask and imploring the public to “wear a mask, wash your hands, practice social distancing.”
That was 11 days before Trump did the same thing.
In Ossoff’s ad, a chart shows the rising COVID-19 death count, while Trump and Perdue comment about the virus. But the chart is misleading. For example, when Perdue said “the risk of this virus … still remains low,” the chart shows the number of deaths increasing from about 15,000 to 83,000. But, as we said, that comment was made when there were about 1,500 cases and about 37 deaths nationwide (and just 17 cases and no deaths in Georgia). Similarly, the graphic shows the death count rising from about 180,000 to about 210,000 when Perdue said “the numbers projected were supposed to be much worse” — when, in fact, there were 54,761 deaths at the time of his remarks on April 28.
That puts Perdue’s comments in a worse light. Still, Perdue’s comments comparing COVID-19 to the flu, praising Georgia’s early reopening plan and crediting Trump for keeping the death count below projections are all flawed. But again, we’ll let readers determine for themselves if those comments prove Perdue “ignored the medical experts” and “downplayed the crisis.”
Editor’s note: FactCheck.org does not accept advertising. We rely on grants and individual donations from people like you. Please consider a donation. Credit card donations may be made through our “Donate” page. If you prefer to give by check, send to: FactCheck.org, Annenberg Public Policy Center, 202 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA 19104. 

This fact check is available at IFCN’s 2020 US Elections FactChat #Chatbot on WhatsApp. Click here for more.
Noting that the United States accounts for about one-quarter of global COVID-19 cases and deaths, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said the U.S. has “the worst record of any country in the world.” While the U.S. has the most confirmed cases and deaths by a wide margin, it does not have the most in either category on a per-capita basis.
Pelosi emphasized the U.S. share of coronavirus-related cases and deaths during a June 28 interview on ABC’s “This Week” in which she argued the Trump administration is not taking the growing outbreak in several U.S. states seriously.
“We are 4% of the world’s population,” the Democratic leader told host George Stephanopoulos. “We are 25% of the cases and the deaths, 25%. We have the worst record of any country in the world. And the president says we’re making progress or whatever.”
Pelosi got the percentages right, but where the U.S. ranks in dealing with the pandemic depends on how one looks at the numbers.
Total Confirmed Cases
Pelosi’s deputy chief of staff, Drew Hammill, confirmed to FactCheck.org in an email that the congresswoman labeled the U.S. the “worst” based on it “having the most coronavirus deaths and confirmed cases of any country.”
According to the University of Oxford-based project Our World in Data, as of June 28, the day Pelosi made her claim, there were 9.95 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 worldwide, and 2.51 million, or 25%, of those cases were in the U.S — the most of any nation.
The U.S. total was 1.2 million cases more than the second-highest country, Brazil, which had 1.31 million cases as of that day.

Confirmed Cases Per Capita
But the U.S. did not have the most cases per capita — which takes into account a country’s population.
As of June 28, the U.S. had 7,584 confirmed cases per 1 million people, which was fewer cases than nine other nations, including Chile (14,007.27), Kuwait (10,394.65) and Peru (8,370.44). Qatar, which has an estimated population of almost 3 million, had the most cases per capita — 32,509.91 per 1 million people.

Total Confirmed Deaths
Based on the raw numbers, the U.S. also led all countries with 125,539, or 25%, of the 498,521 confirmed deaths from COVID-19, as of June 28 — according to Our World in Data figures. Brazil again was second to the U.S. with 57,070 confirmed deaths.

Confirmed Deaths Per Capita
Per capita, however, the U.S. — with 379.27 confirmed deaths per 1 million people — had fewer fatalities from COVID-19 than eight other nations.
Among those countries with more confirmed deaths per capita: Belgium (839.72), the United Kingdom (640.99), Italy (574.18), Sweden (522.81) and France (456.20).

Case Fatality Rate
In addition, the U.S. had a lower COVID-19 case fatality rate than several nations. The case fatality rate is the number of confirmed deaths divided by confirmed cases.
As of June 28, the U.S. rate was 5% — lower than the rate in dozens of other countries.

According to statistics compiled by Johns Hopkins University, out of the 20 countries most affected by COVID-19, the U.S., as of June 30, has the fifth highest observed case-fatality ratio for COVID-19 and the second highest per-capita death rate.
Pelosi’s claim, that the U.S. has fared the worst based on its total confirmed cases and deaths, reminded us of President Donald Trump’s claims that the U.S. leads the world in testing for COVID-19 simply based on the number of tests performed.
In Trump’s case, we also pointed out that because of the large U.S. population, a per-capita comparison would be a better gauge of countries’ testing efforts. By that measurement, we found the U.S. trailed at least a dozen countries in testing for the disease, as of May 9, and it’s still not leading the world.
Pelosi no doubt has a point about the large number of confirmed cases and deaths in the U.S. — and it is in no way our intention to minimize the seriousness of the situation.
But, similar to Trump’s boasts on testing, whether the U.S. has the “worst record” – as Pelosi said — also depends on the metric used.
Editor’s note: FactCheck.org does not accept advertising. We rely on grants and individual donations from people like you. Please consider a donation. Credit card donations may be made through our “Donate” page. If you prefer to give by check, send to: FactCheck.org, Annenberg Public Policy Center, 202 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.
In this video, we take a look at COVID-19 antibody tests, which can reveal whether someone was previously infected with the novel coronavirus — and explain why a positive or negative result may not always be so easy to interpret.

Antibodies are Y-shaped proteins the body generates as part of an immune response to a specific pathogen. Because the proteins are highly specific, tests that can check for the presence of antibodies in a person’s blood have the potential to identify people who have already encountered the virus.
Such information is critical to figuring out how widely the novel coronavirus, or SARS-CoV-2, has spread, and could also be used to identify people who are immune.
But the tests are only beginning to be rolled out, and many are not accurate enough to use.
Further complicating any use of the tests in the clinic is that scientists don’t know whether antibodies can protect someone from becoming infected again with COVID-19. While experts strongly suspect that will be the case, it’s not known for certain yet, nor it is clear how long any potential immunity would last.
For more on antibody tests, including the basics of how the tests work, see our story, “Q&A on COVID-19 Antibody Tests.”
FactCheck.org does not accept advertising. We rely on grants and individual donations from people like you. Please consider a donation. Credit card donations may be made through our “Donate” page. If you prefer to give by check, send to: FactCheck.org, Annenberg Public Policy Center, 202 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Leading Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden repeatedly has criticized President Donald Trump for failing to make timely use of his powers under the Defense Production Act to compel companies to manufacture medical supplies that are expected to be needed to treat those infected with the novel coronavirus.
Biden claims he was one of the first to call for the need to use the Defense Production Act. The Trump campaign says Biden only began calling for that on the same day — March 18 — that Trump said he was invoking the act. There’s a bit of spin coming from both sides on this.
We couldn’t find evidence that Biden has been calling for use of the law for as long as he suggests, and Trump did not invoke the full force of the act back on March 18.
With the use of the Defense Production Act becoming a frequent point of contention between Trump and his critics, we thought it would be helpful to explain what the act is and how Trump has (and has not) applied it to date.
What Is the Defense Production Act?
First enacted in 1950 in response to the Korean War and last amended in 2018, the Defense Production Act provides the president broad authority to “influence domestic industry in the interest of national defense,” as a Congressional Research Service report put it in 2020.
“The authorities can be used across the federal government to shape the domestic industrial base so that, when called upon, it is capable of providing essential materials and goods needed for the national defense,” the CRS report states.
The law authorizes the president to identify businesses “capable” of producing “scarce and critical material” to “require acceptance and performance” of contracts to meet those needs. The act also allows the president to incentivize U.S. companies to expand production of critical materials with such things as “loans, loan guarantees, direct purchases and purchase commitments, and the authority to procure and install equipment in private industrial facilities,” the CRS report says.
As the New York Times reported, the law has been used hundreds of thousands of times during the Trump administration, “especially by the military to give its contract priority ratings to jump ahead of a vendor’s other clients.” The Times noted that in recent years, the administration has also used the powers contained in the act to restore power grids and to supply emergency food and water in areas devastated by hurricanes in 2017.
On Feb. 28, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar first signaled that the administration might use the Defense Production Act for the coronavirus to expedite contracts for medical supplies, such as face masks and gloves.
“I don’t have any procurements I need it for now, but if I need it, we’ll use it,” Azar said at a White House briefing.
“We’ll use it if we need to, but we, obviously, if we can work cooperatively with any vendor, we’d rather do that,” Azar said in a March 1 interview on “Fox News Sunday.”
On March 13, 57 House Democrats wrote a letter urging the president to “use the powers afforded by the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. §§4501 et seq.) to begin the mass production of supplies needed to address the ongoing Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.”
The letter highlighted the likelihood of shortages of N95 respirators and face masks, testing equipment, and medical supplies like ventilators, and warned that “failure to act now” could “endanger American lives.”
“These authorities could be used to direct the domestic production of equipment currently in short supply, like personal protective equipment and ventilators,” the letter states. “This would ensure we have the materials we need at the ready, rather than wait for disruptions in the global supply chain to subside.
“During World War II, our country adapted to the demands of the time to produce mass quantities of bombers, tanks, and many small items needed to save democracy and freedom in the world,” the letter stated. “We know what the demands of this time are, and we must act now to meet these demands. We urge you to invoke the Defense Production Act without delay.”
Trump Invokes the Defense Production Act
Five days later, on March 18, Trump invoked the Defense Production Act “just in case we need it.” But Trump stopped short of implementing the act to force production of certain goods. Later that day, Trump tweeted, “I only signed the Defense Production Act to combat the Chinese Virus should we need to invoke it in a worst case scenario in the future. Hopefully there will be no need.”
Via Twitter, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer hailed the move as “an important step,” but added, “so much more is needed NOW.”
That same day, Biden released a statement on “immediate actions” he believed the Trump administration should take to address the pandemic. It called for Trump to “Prioritize and immediately increase domestic production of any critical medical equipment required to respond to this crisis — such as the production of ventilators and associated training to operate — by invoking the Defense Production Act, delegating authority to HHS and FEMA. This action must be built on forecasted demand, using the best modeling currently available for negative scenarios.”
In the following days, Trump said that he was reluctant to use the Defense Production Act to force corporations to make products, likening such a move to “nationalizing our businesses.”
Trump, March 22: We’re a country not based on nationalizing our business. Call a person over in Venezuela; ask them how did nationalization of their businesses work out. Not too well. The concept of nationalizing our business is not a good concept.
Besides, he said, companies were voluntarily stepping up with offers to produce masks, ventilators and other needed medical supplies and equipment.
Trump, March 26: For the most part, the companies … We say, “We need this,” and they say, “Don’t bother. We’re going to do it.” I mean, we — we’re dealing with Ford, General Motors, 3M. We’re dealing with great companies. They want to do this. They want to do this. They’re doing things that — that frankly, they don’t need somebody to walk over there with a — with a hammer and say, “Do it.” They are getting it done.
We should note that compelling a company to produce supplies is not the same as “nationalizing” the business. Under the act, private businesses would be paid for their production and would remain private companies, not government entities.
What Biden Said and When
In recent days, Biden has criticized Trump for failing to fully use the Defense Production Act, something he says Trump should have done weeks or even months ago. Biden has also cast himself as one of the earliest to call for it.

According to a March 22 pool report of a Biden phone call, the Democratic candidate “reiterated his call for the president to invoke the ‘full power of the Defense Production Act’ and noted he called for that a month ago.”
In a YouTube speech on March 23, Biden said, “As of late yesterday, we’re told that the president still has not activated the authority under the Defense Production Act, which I and others call for him to invoke immediately and act on, to direct American manufacturers to make essential supplies. Trump keeps saying that he’s a wartime president, well start to act like one. … We need to get in motion. Get in motion today what we should have set in motion weeks ago.
“I would have enacted it a long time ago, Jake,” Biden told CNN’s Jake Tapper on March 24. “I think it was three — two, three weeks ago I pointed out that the president should enact this. It should have been enacted months ago.”
During an online news conference the following day, Biden said, “I think it’s really important that we understand that this idea of this Defense Production Act, he talks about signing, he doesn’t want to dictate to companies. There’s things we need now, now, not tomorrow, not yesterday, but months ago or a month ago, and the president’s not acting.”
And finally, on MSNBC on March 30, Biden said, “I talked about doing the Defense Production Act before anyone came along.”

The Trump campaign said that as far as it could tell, the first time Biden ever called for Trump to use the Defense Production Act was on March 18, the same day Trump invoked it (but did not use it to compel a company to start producing something).
We reached out to the Biden campaign for evidence that Biden had called for use of the Defense Production Act prior to that, but we got no response. We could not find any public comments from Biden prior to the statement he put out on March 18 — which we referenced earlier.
Prior to March 18, we found instances of Biden talking generally, as he did on March 12, about the need to “surge our capacity” at hospitals, and make “sure communities have the hospital beds available, the staff, the medical supplies, the personal protective equipment necessary to treat the patient.”
Biden did not mention the Defense Production Act in the Democratic debate on March 15, where he encouraged viewers to see his full, detailed plan to combat COVID-19 on his campaign website. Nor does that plan, which was initially posted to the campaign website on March 12, mention the Defense Production Act. 
Biden’s plan says only that the federal government should “[w]ork with businesses to expand production of personal protective equipment, including masks and gloves, and additional products such as bleach and alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Incentivize greater supplier production of these critically important medically supplies, including committing, if necessary, to large scale volume purchasing and removing all relevant trade barriers to their acquisition.”
“Work[ing] with businesses to expand production of personal protective equipment” was essentially the Trump administration policy at the time.
If his first public call for Trump to use the Defense Production Act was March 18, Biden would have been exaggerating when he said on March 22 that he called for that a month before, or on March 24 when he said he made those calls “two, three weeks ago.”
It also would have been five days after 57 House members wrote to the president urging him to use the act, and two days after his rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, Sen. Bernie Sanders, publicly called on Trump “to use existing emergency authority under the Defense Production Act to dramatically scale up production in the United States of critical supplies such as masks, ventilators, and protective equipment that our health care workers need.”
We will update this story if the Biden campaign gets back to us with earlier examples.
We can say for sure, though, that Biden has repeatedly claimed to have issued a warning about the seriousness of the virus earlier than he actually did.
“All of the way back in January 17, I wrote a piece for U.S. News & World Report saying, ‘We have got a real problem. The president, we have — coronavirus is real. We have to start acting now,'” Biden said in a March 24 interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper.
The op-ed he wrote was actually for USA Today, and it was published on Jan. 27, not Jan. 17. Those 10 days make a big difference. Biden’s op-ed on Jan. 27 was just four days before the Trump administration announced travel restrictions on those who had traveled to China in the previous two weeks. Had Biden published that op-ed on Jan. 17, he would have been well ahead of the curve.
We would chalk up Biden’s date mix-up to a simple misstatement, but he has cited that same incorrect date at least three other times since.

“For example, way back in January 17th I argued that this virus was coming. I did a, I think it was US News and World Report, I did a piece on saying it’s coming. We’ve got to prepare,” Biden said in an online news conference on March 25
“I wrote an article back in January 17th saying we should be prepared now and laid out the things that I thought we should be doing then,” he said in a CNN town hall on March 27.
“You may recall, I was the first one to call for the president, way back in January 17th, to take this seriously,” Biden said on March 30 on MSNBC. “A real serious crisis is coming, an article I wrote.”

Trump Uses Defense Production Act
On March 23, Trump signed a new executive order “to prohibit the hoarding of needed resources,” citing the authority given to him under the Defense Production Act. On March 30, federal authorities invoked that order when they charged a Brooklyn man for hoarding surgical masks, medical gowns and other medical supplies that authorities said he was selling at inflated prices from his home.
Despite his early reluctance to employ the Defense Production Act to compel businesses to make supplies necessary for the COVID-19 response, Trump said in a March 27 press conference that he had invoked the act “to compel General Motors to accept, perform, and prioritize federal contracts for ventilators.”
Trump also tapped Peter Navarro, a White House trade adviser, to act as national Defense Production Act policy coordinator. At the press conference, Navarro explained that the Defense Production Act was employed to compel General Motors to make ventilators only after the federal government “ran into roadblocks” in its negotiations with GM over production.
Navarro, March 27: We need industrial mobilization to make adequate ventilators, particularly in the very short run, to help people of New York, Detroit, New Orleans, Chicago, Denver, Seattle, all around this country, as this virus bears down. And the ventilators really are the most important thing for patients who become most seriously ill. They’re literally the lifeline for people. And I’ve personally been working with FEMA, and I’ve been working with HHS and over 10 ventilator companies, making sure we can get what we need as quickly as possible. And virtually every one of those companies has been cooperative, patriotic, moving in Trump time — which is to say as soon as possible, sir. But we did have a problem with GM and Ventec. On the one hand, we had Ford and GE moving forward on a similar kind of project, patriotically moving as fast as possible. Over the last several days, we ran into roadblocks with GM. We cannot afford to lose a single day, particularly over the next 30 to 60 days. So President Trump invoked the Defense Production Act as a way of enhancing and accelerating this mobilization.
In an interview on CNN on March 31, Biden said Trump’s action was too slow, and too limited.
Biden, March 31: And he’s been very slow to act. For whatever the reason has been. Been very slow to act on a whole range of things. For example, he still hasn’t fully invoked the Defense Production Act. Which I called for a while ago. He finally did with General Motors after a little roundabout in terms of building ventilators. What about the masks? What about those gowns that those nurses and doctors need? They’re made of paper. What about the goggles the need, the face shields, what about the gloves they need? He can do that by the Defense Production Act right now. He could have done it yesterday, a week ago, three weeks ago, five weeks ago. They’re in short supply. And our first responders are literally risking and some losing their lives to try to help the American people.
Biden is entitled to his opinion that the president acted slowly and “still hasn’t fully invoked the Defense Production Act.” But we could find no evidence that Biden called for the president to use the act prior to March 18, despite his repeated claims that he had done so much earlier.
President Joe Biden boasts that the U.S. is on pace to be the first country in the world to vaccinate 100 million people. That’s true, but per capita the U.S. is not tops in the world in vaccinations.
Israel has administered about four times as many doses per 100 people as the U.S., and the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom have also administered significantly more doses per capita than the U.S., according to Our World in Data.
Speaking at an event on Feb. 25 commemorating the 50 millionth COVID-19 vaccine shot, Biden noted that the U.S. is ahead of schedule to deliver on his promise of administering 100 million vaccine doses in his first 100 days in office.
As we have written, the U.S. was already virtually at the pace Biden set as his goal — 1 million shots per day — before he took any action as president. It has risen since then. The seven-day average daily number of people vaccinated was 1.4 million on Feb. 24, 47% higher than on Jan. 20, when Biden was inaugurated, according to  the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s COVID Data Tracker. According to preliminary numbers from the CDC, the U.S. had administered more than 78 million vaccine doses by March 1, with more than 57 million of them coming since Biden took office. 
“And the more people get vaccinated, the faster we’re going to beat this pandemic,” Biden said from the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. “That’s why one of my first goals in office when I — just before I was sworn in, I indicated that my goal was to get 100 million COVID-19 vaccine shots in people’s arms in my first 100 days as president. At first, critics said that goal was too ambitious; no one could do that. And then they said it was too small. But the bottom line, though, is that America will be the first country — perhaps the only one — to get that done.”
In remarks at a Federal Emergency Management Agency COVID-19 vaccination facility in Houston the following day, Biden again boasted that the U.S. was “ahead of schedule” to meet his 100 million shots in 100 days goal.
“And because of the people behind me and others, America … is going to be the first in the country — perhaps the first in the world — to get that done,” Biden said.
The implication, of course, is that the U.S. — the third most populous country — is leading the world in vaccine distribution. And in raw numbers, that’s accurate, according to the University of Oxford-based project Our World in Data.
But that’s not true per capita.
Looking at the total COVID-19 vaccination doses administered per capita for countries with a population of at least 1 million, Israel leads the world, with 94.9 doses per 100 people as of March 1. Second is the UAE at 60.9 doses per 100 people, and the United Kingdom is third at 31.1 doses per 100 people. By this measure, the U.S. ranks fourth at 23.2 doses per 100 people. This represents people who have gotten at least one dose of vaccine. The Moderna and Pfizer vaccines — the only vaccines that had been administered at that time — require two doses to be most effective.

The United States’ seven-day average for daily vaccine doses administered per 100 people also ranked fourth on March 1.
Nor is the U.S. tops when looking at the percentage of a country’s population that has gotten at least one dose of a vaccine. According to a New York Times project, “Tracking Coronavirus Vaccinations Around the World,” Israel (54%), the United Kingdom (30.5%), Bahrain (19%) and Chile (19%) all have vaccinated a larger percentage of their population than the U.S. (15%).
Biden’s boast about the raw number of vaccinations in the U.S. leading the world reminds us of former President Donald Trump’s frequent claims that the U.S. led the world in testing for the coronavirus. But as is the case with Biden here, Trump was citing raw numbers for a relatively populous U.S. as opposed to the per-capita figure.



Editor’s Note: FactCheck.org does not accept advertising. We rely on grants and individual donations from people like you. Please consider a donation. Credit card donations may be made through our “Donate” page. If you prefer to give by check, send to: FactCheck.org, Annenberg Public Policy Center, 202 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Last month, the Biden administration announced a plan to begin administering third shots of the two mRNA COVID-19 vaccines to healthy people in mid-September to shore up potentially flagging immunity to the coronavirus. 
But many scientists say that given the available evidence, which shows the two-dose vaccines still provide formidable protection against severe disease, it’s not yet clear that boosters are needed.
“What we expected from this vaccine is that we wanted it to protect against severe disease and the kind of disease that caused you to go to the hospital or ICU. That was the goal — keep people out of the hospital and keep them out of the morgue,” Dr. Paul A. Offit, a vaccine expert at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, told us. “There’s no evidence that there’s any fading of immunity in that regard.”
In fact, on Sept. 3, Acting FDA Commissioner Dr. Janet Woodcock and CDC Director Dr. Rochelle Walensky, a few weeks after backing the plan, told the White House that the FDA and CDC might only be able to make a determination on the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for a subset of non-immunocompromised people in the next several weeks. That’s because of a lack of data on both vaccines in the larger population.
Moreover, some experts say booster shots are unlikely to alter the trajectory of the pandemic much — and that the doses would be much better spent getting people around the world immunized with first and second shots. 
“I’m truly disappointed. This decision is not justifiable at all looking at this data,” tweeted Dr. Muge Cevik, a physician and infectious disease expert at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland, who also serves as a COVID-19 advisor to the Scottish and U.K. governments. “We are going to use up millions of doses to reduce the small risk of mild infections in fully protected [people with] a tiny risk of hospitalisation, while most of the world waits for a first dose.”
The controversial announcement, made in an Aug. 18 press briefing by multiple top public health officials, proposed offering a third “booster” shot to Americans eight months after their second dose of a Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna vaccine. According to the plan, this would mean those initially prioritized for the first two doses — primarily older people and health care workers — would also get first dibs on a booster.
The nation’s health agencies had already signed off on providing a third dose of the mRNA vaccines to immunocompromised people. The Food and Drug Administration authorized additional doses in that population for emergency use on Aug. 12, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices and the agency endorsed that view the following day. 
Those doses, which are meant to try to bump up a lackluster immune response to normal levels, are not controversial — and they aren’t typically referred to as boosters, which is a term sometimes reserved for an extra dose that is used to restore immunity after the primary series is complete. Some scientists have argued that in healthy people, third doses for COVID-19 should also not be called boosters if a three-dose course is the standard regimen. 
The mRNA COVID-19 vaccines could very well turn out to be three-dose shots, as multiple other immunizations involve three doses. But because that is not yet fully established — and the vaccine companies and federal agencies are also using the term — we will refer to third doses for healthy people as boosters for now.
While health officials repeatedly said that the decision to boost in healthy people would only occur pending review by FDA and ACIP, a specific date — Sept. 20 — was nevertheless set for the rollout to begin.
A statement, signed by all the leading public health officials, including Acting FDA Commissioner Dr. Janet Woodcock and CDC Director Dr. Rochelle Walensky, was released the same day explaining the plan, which did not yet include a second dose for the Johnson & Johnson vaccine.
“The available data make very clear that protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection begins to decrease over time following the initial doses of vaccination, and in association with the dominance of the Delta variant, we are starting to see evidence of reduced protection against mild and moderate disease,” the statement reads, referring to the coronavirus. “Based on our latest assessment, the current protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death could diminish in the months ahead, especially among those who are at higher risk or were vaccinated during the earlier phases of the vaccination rollout. For that reason, we conclude that a booster shot will be needed to maximize vaccine-induced protection and prolong its durability.”
Offit is critical of how the announcement circumvented the standard procedures. “It was just declared to be something that we were going to be doing,” he said. “It didn’t go through the FDA advisory committees, it didn’t go through the CDC advisory committees.”
And, he said, it was badly communicated. “It’s confusing to people. People think they’re no longer protected and they are protected,” he said. “I consider myself to be protected against severe disease, based on all the data.”
Other experts said the messaging could be problematic, especially for people already harboring mistrust of the vaccines. “For those who think [the vaccine is] either ineffective, experimental, or doesn’t work, the idea that there would already need to be a booster — that they’re kind of changing information around the vaccine — could certainly lead to an increased reticence to not get it,” Rachael Piltch-Loeb, a public health emergency researcher at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, told us.
Two high-level FDA employees overseeing vaccine regulation decided to leave the agency later this fall, reportedly in part because of disagreement over the booster shot decision and the way it was handled.
Before the Sept. 3 news that the FDA and CDC may only recommend boosters in more limited circumstances, it had already been unclear how the administration would be able to stick to its Sept. 20 deadline. A Pfizer representative said in an Aug. 30 regulatory meeting that the company would have efficacy data on its booster shot by late September or early October. Pfizer began submitting data to the FDA on Aug. 16 and started its supplemental approval application on Aug. 25; Moderna began submitting data on its half-dose booster to the agency on Sept. 1. The FDA’s independent advisory committee is slated to review Pfizer’s booster application on Sept. 17.
Update, Sept. 24: The CDC issued booster shot recommendations on Sept. 24, saying that people age 65 and older, residents in long-term care facilities, and people age 50 to 64 with underlying medical conditions should get a booster shot of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine at least six months after they completed the primary two-shot series. The agency said that two other groups – those age 18 to 49 with underlying medical conditions or 18 to 64 with increased risk of exposure to COVID-19 because of their jobs or institutional setting – “may” get a booster shot in the same time frame “based on their individual benefits and risks.” 
On Sept. 22, the FDA had amended the emergency use authorization for the Pfizer vaccine to allow for booster shots for those groups. 
In addition to real-world efficacy data, the FDA reviewed data from Pfizer/BioNTech on a subset of those participating in the original clinical trial. Pfizer/BioNTech also found that the incidence of COVID-19 among those who were fully vaccinated early in the clinical trial was higher in July and August, compared with trial participants who got their doses later. “The FDA determined that the rate of breakthrough COVID-19 reported during this time period translates to a modest decrease in the efficacy of the vaccine among those vaccinated earlier,” FDA said.
The FDA’s Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee had supported the amended EUA for those groups. It voted against recommending a booster shot of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for everyone 16 and older in its Sept. 17 meeting. The CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices voted on Sept. 23 to recommend boosters for the first three groups in the CDC’s recommendations, but not for 18- to 64-year-olds at increased risk because of their jobs or institutional setting. The vote was 9-6 against that recommendation. In a statement, Walensky, the CDC director, said: “At CDC, we are tasked with analyzing complex, often imperfect data to make concrete recommendations that optimize health. In a pandemic, even with uncertainty, we must take actions that we anticipate will do the greatest good.”     

Several other countries either have plans to roll out booster shots to their populations or have begun them — most notably Israel, which is experiencing a surge of the delta variant and first promoted boosters for people 60 years of age and older, given at least five months after the second shot, before moving to individuals 12 and older on Aug. 29. But much of the rest of the globe has yet to get a first inoculation. 
“We’re planning to hand out extra life-jackets to people who already have life jackets while we’re leaving other people to drown without a single life jacket,” said Dr. Mike Ryan, the executive director of the World Health Organization’s Health Emergencies Programme, in a press briefing on Aug. 18. “That’s the reality.”
The agency has called for a moratorium on boosters for people who are not immunocompromised, at least until the end of the month, to allow the most vulnerable people in all countries to be vaccinated.
Here, we’ll explain what the studies say so far and why some scientists are skeptical of the immediate need for boosters, given the strong performance of the vaccines thus far.
The Case for Boosters
In presenting their rationale for the decision on Aug. 18, health officials pointed to multiple recent studies conducted in the U.S. that have suggested a decline in the real-world effectiveness of the Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna vaccines in preventing any kind of lab-confirmed infection.
One study, published in the CDC’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, identified a modest decline in vaccine effectiveness against any kind of lab-confirmed infection, whether symptomatic or not — from 92% in early May to 75% in late July — in adults living in New York state, the vast majority of whom had been immunized with mRNA vaccines. 
An unpublished study of patients in the Mayo Clinic Health System compared the two mRNA vaccines and found the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine began with an effectiveness of 76% against any kind of PCR-confirmed infection in January that fell to 42% in July. The drop for Moderna was smaller, from 86% to 76%.
An MMWR study of a more vulnerable population — U.S. nursing home residents — found that the effectiveness of the mRNA vaccines against lab-confirmed infections fell from 75% in the pre-delta era to 53% with delta.
Walensky also presented data that was published in the MMWR the following week, which showed a decrease in vaccine effectiveness against PCR-confirmed infection in frontline workers, from 91% before the delta variant to 66% when delta predominated. Those workers were screened weekly for COVID-19 and also were tested if they had COVID-19-like symptoms.
These declines, officials said, could be due to waning immunity over time, the delta variant or some combination of the two.
Notably, however, officials said there was not much evidence that the vaccines were working less well in protecting against severe disease. The New York study, for example, found that vaccine protection against hospitalization remained at 90% or higher for each week analyzed. And another MMWR report, which drew on hospital information from 18 states, found the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines stayed 84% to 86% effective in preventing hospitalization for 24 weeks.
Instead, the argument was that the reduced effectiveness against infection and milder forms of illness could be a harbinger of what might come — and that the government therefore wanted to plan for boosters to “stay ahead” of the virus. 
“Even though this new data affirms that vaccine protection remains high against the worst outcomes of COVID, we are concerned that this pattern of decline we are seeing will continue in the months ahead, which could lead to reduced protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death,” explained Dr. Vivek Murthy, the U.S. surgeon general.
Dr. Anthony Fauci, Biden’s chief medical adviser and director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, also outlined the immunological basis for boosters, noting that antibody levels decline following vaccination; that higher antibody levels are associated with higher vaccine efficacy, which could be needed against delta; and that there’s evidence from both vaccine companies that booster shots can greatly increase antibody levels.
Officials mentioned data coming out of Israel to bolster their case, but did not cover it in any detail until a press briefing on Sept. 2. Israel has fully vaccinated almost 63% of its population, as of Sept. 1, and has used the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for nearly all of its citizens.
In the Sept. 2 briefing, Fauci noted the rising number of COVID-19 cases among the vaccinated in Israel and reviewed two unpublished papers, posted to preprint servers, documenting the effects of a booster dose in the country. 
One preprint, using Ministry of Health information on people over the age of 60 who either did or did not receive a third dose, found a more than 10-fold decrease in the risk of confirmed infection and severe disease in booster recipients compared with non-booster recipients, 12 or more days after boosting. 
A second preprint analyzed data from more than 150,000 people in an Israeli health care system who were tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection in the first three weeks of August. It found that seven to 13 days after a booster shot, people were 46% to 68% less likely to test positive for the virus compared with those who had not received a booster; the risk reduction increased to 70% to 84% 14 to 20 days post-booster.
“There’s no doubt from the dramatic data from the Israeli study,” Fauci said, “that the boosts that are being now done there and contemplated here support, very strongly, the rationale for such an approach.”
Recently, officials have also cited internal data along with that of other countries to support their decision, such as when Walensky was asked in an Aug. 31 press conference whether she was still confident that boosters would be available by Sept. 20, given some reluctance on the issue from the CDC’s advisory committee the previous day.
“ACIP did not review international data that actually has led us to be even more concerned about increased risk of vaccine effectiveness waning against hospitalization, severe disease and death,” she said. “They will be reviewing that as well, but it is our own data as well as international data that has led us to be concerned that the waning we’re seeing for infection will soon lead to a waning that we would see for hospitalizations, severe disease and death, which is why it’s so critical now, to plan ahead, to remain ahead of the virus.”
It is unclear what internal data Walensky might have. We reached out to the agency for more details, including when that data would be made public, but did not receive a reply.
Lack of an Obvious Need to Boost Immunity
While Fauci may be convinced by the data, other scientists are not so sure. Not only is it not yet known how helpful a booster will be long-term, they say, but it’s far from clear that they are needed in the first place.
While it depends on the goal of vaccination and is ultimately a judgment call, multiple experts told us that boosters wouldn’t be warranted until the vaccines started to be less effective in preventing severe illness, which for healthy people, hasn’t happened yet.
“The best available data that we have are that these vaccines are still working really well against the current variants and this current wave,” Johns Hopkins epidemiologist David Dowdy told us.
Some people have pointed to Israeli data that might suggest a decline in vaccine effectiveness against severe COVID-19 in older people, but no published or preprint work convincingly demonstrates this yet, Dr. Aaron Richterman, an infectious disease fellow at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, told us.
Some studies, he said — in particular a well-done unpublished study from Oxford University that involved random testing of households for SARS-CoV-2 — have observed modest decreases in vaccine protection against infection (see figure 2). But in his view, infection alone would not warrant a booster rollout.
A visually compelling example of the vaccines’ preserved effectiveness against hospitalization comes from the CDC’s COVID-19-Associated Hospitalization Surveillance Network, or COVID-NET, which tracks COVID-19 hospitalizations in 14 states.
idence
The immunology data also back the notion that in healthy people, the vaccines are holding steady against severe COVID-19, if not always against infection or more mild illness.
“We see antibodies going down, but we know that these vaccines make very good T cell responses and B cell responses that very likely protect from serious disease,” E. John Wherry, an immunologist at the University of Pennsylvania who has been studying the immune responses of vaccinated people, told us.
High levels of so-called neutralizing antibodies are needed to prevent infection entirely, or what’s known as sterilizing immunity. But if those decline, which is normal, there are still immune cells around to ward off illness — namely, the B cells that make antibodies and the T cells that assist in that process and can also kill infected cells to limit the spread of a virus in a body.
Both cell types need time to kick into gear when a person is first infected or first vaccinated, but with a second exposure, the cells can re-engage, proliferate and more quickly mount an immune response than before — preventing a person from falling very ill.
“Severe disease occurs when the virus begins to replicate unchecked in the lungs and the immune system misfires in efforts to control it,” Deepta Bhattacharya, an immunologist at the University of Arizona College of Medicine, told us. “Fortunately, the lungs are much more accessible to antibodies than is the upper respiratory tract, which is where the virus first enters. Moreover, because the virus hits the upper respiratory tract first, it buys memory B and T cells time to get going too before the lung becomes accessible to the virus. So for these reasons, protection against severe disease is expected to be maintained for far longer than protection against all infections.”
Wherry’s lab and others have shown that these long-lived and memory B and T cell responses to mRNA vaccination are durable, lasting at least six months, and likely longer.
Some unpublished work from the Wherry lab suggests that the pool of memory B cells that can recognize the virus continues to increase over time after vaccination, unlike antibodies that wane.
All of this is why immunologists suspect boosters might not be needed for a while yet.
“We could have protection against severe disease for a year, two years, three years,” said CHOP’s Offit, who nevertheless said boosters were likely eventually. “We’ll see.”
It’s also why Offit doesn’t buy the administration’s argument that fading vaccine immunity against infection or mild disease necessarily presages dwindling effectiveness against severe disease. “I think it’s built on a false premise,” he said. 
Bhattacharya similarly said that he thought it would be “years” before a booster is needed to increase protection against severe disease. But if the goal is to prevent infection, then it might take annual boosters to keep antibody levels high.
A Benefit to Boosting Now?
The experts we spoke with agreed that giving third doses of the mRNA vaccines now could very well be somewhat helpful, but likely only to a limited degree — and would not be as advantageous as immunizing unvaccinated people.
“Boosting would almost certainly raise the concentration of antibodies for a while. How much clinical benefit we would see is much harder to predict,” Bhattacharya told us in an email. “Given that most estimates place the current 2-dose regimen at ~80+% effectiveness against symptomatic infections, there is not a ton of room to improve.”
“The real question is whether booster shots enhance memory,” said Dowdy. “If so, they could boost immunity for a longer period of time. But we have no evidence one way or the other on that. And also no compelling evidence that immunity from the initial vaccine series has waned to the extent that a booster is needed.”
While on the surface the Israeli studies suggest boosters might have a large impact, those effects have so far been observed only for a short period of time, and it remains unknown how long they might last.
“It would be very surprising if a third dose of a vaccine that we already know is effective didn’t decrease risk of infection by some amount over the short-term,” Richterman said. But, he added, the extra dose “probably doesn’t decrease it to the degree that these observational studies from Israel suggest because of large differences in exposure risk / behaviors between those getting the booster and those who did not.”
Richterman was especially dubious of the booster preprint that claimed a 10-fold reduction in the risk for severe COVID-19, which he said was “essentially uninterpretable” because it had a design flaw known as immortal time bias. Because outcomes weren’t counted for the boosted group until 12 days after getting the booster, he said, that group likely had less follow-up than the unboosted group, biasing the results in favor of boosters. “It takes on average 5 days from diagnosis to develop severe infection, oftentimes much longer,” he said, “so you can imagine that the boosted group has probably in many cases not even had the chance to have this outcome.”
It should be more clear what effect boosters have once the results are in from Pfizer/BioNTech’s phase 3 randomized controlled trial, he said.
Dowdy also cautioned against relying too heavily on the Israeli experience. Noting that the population of the country is about the same as the state of Michigan — and the U.S. would be unlikely to make national policy based on one state — he said, “we should be similarly hesitant to formulate national policy on data from a country the size of Israel.”
Another potential boon of boosters is their impact on reducing transmission of the coronavirus. But many scientists are skeptical that boosters will do much to bring the pandemic to a close.
“I doubt this would have a dramatic impact on the trajectory of the pandemic,” Bhattacharya said. “We know that vaccinated breakthrough infections can transmit, but the major drivers of the pandemic are still transmission from and to the unvaccinated.”
“The problem right now is not that we need to boost people who are already vaccinated. The problem is we need to vaccinate people who aren’t vaccinated,” said Offit. “The vaccine’s working, but it doesn’t work if we don’t give it.”
Relative to vaccinating new people, booster shots would be expected to be only incrementally helpful in reducing transmission and mitigating the pandemic, Richterman said. “Keep in mind that 1% of the low-income world has been vaccinated. If we want to end the pandemic, that is where the work must be done,” he added.
For its part, the Biden administration says it can “do both” — provide boosters to Americans while also helping other countries get first and second jabs. Officials have emphasized that the U.S. is the global leader in vaccine donations and announced on Sept. 2 that the government would be investing nearly $3 billion to scale up domestic vaccine manufacturing. Critics, however, say more should be done.
Beyond the ethics of working toward vaccine equity, Dowdy said a case could be made that even from a purely self-serving perspective, the U.S. should focus on helping to administer first and second doses, rather than rolling out booster shots to its own population, as that would limit circulation of the virus overall and help prevent the emergence of more transmissible or dangerous viral variants.
To Boost or Not to Boost?
Ultimately, the decision to boost is “one that’s going to have to be made in the face of imperfect evidence,” said Dowdy. The administration is in the difficult situation of trying to balance waiting for enough evidence against the risk of a surge in cases.
“I feel like the data right now to support any decisions are pretty weak,” he said. “But that’s also the nature of this. There’s no way that we’re going to be able to make the decision with great data without seeing a spike in cases.”
Several scientists said many questions remain about the best way to do a COVID-19 booster, including the number, spacing between doses and whether it’s advantageous to boost with a variant-specific vaccine or mix and match with different vaccines.

“I think that’s going to require more complicated studies to sort out,” Wherry said of the possibility of altering the timing of the doses or using mix-and-matched shots. “And I don’t know that we’re going to get to the bottom of that in the current pandemic situation.”


As for what happens next with the administration’s booster plan, we’ll learn more in the coming weeks as the FDA and CDC make recommendations and potentially release more research.
Update, Sept. 17: The CDC corrected and republished the New York study on Sept. 17, and we have updated two of the statistics from the study accordingly. 
We also removed a section of this story, which explored the study’s original finding of no decline in vaccine effectiveness for people age 65 and older, but a decline in younger people and the population as a whole. The corrected study now shows a 10.5 percentage point decline in effectiveness, to 80%, for those age 65 and older. That’s still notably lower than the decline of 20.2 percentage points for the 18-to-49 age group. 
We also contacted Johns Hopkins epidemiologist David Dowdy, who had been quoted in that section of our story. Dowdy told us of the corrected study: “I would still say that the trend in vaccine effectiveness over time is very gradual, with the vaccines still having 75% or greater effectiveness at the end of the time period.”
Our original story also said that another CDC study found vaccine effectiveness against infections among nursing home residents had dropped to 52% in the delta era. The correct figure is 53%. 
In his remarks to the nation after signing the latest COVID-19 relief legislation, President Joe Biden stretched the facts, particularly when boasting of the increase in vaccinations on his watch.
Biden spoke on March 11, marking a year since the nation began widespread shutdowns to curb the coronavirus pandemic.
Vaccine Supply
Biden was technically correct but left a misleading impression when he said: “Two months ago, this country didn’t have nearly enough vaccine supply to vaccinate all or ever near all of the American public, but soon we will.”
As we’ve written before, while the Biden administration has increased vaccine orders from the companies with authorized vaccines, the Trump administration had contracts in place for plenty of vaccines for all Americans — provided other vaccines gained authorizations. And Biden’s predecessor also had options to increase orders from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, the first two vaccines to get Food and Drug Administration authorization.
In December, Pfizer and Moderna had agreed to provide 400 million doses (200 million each) by the end of July, according to a Government Accountability Office report. In February, the Biden administration ordered another 200 million doses by the end of July, for a total of 600 million from the two companies for the two-dose vaccines. And the vaccine supply would come faster than originally anticipated.
But the Trump administration could have increased its order with those companies as well, as the initial agreements with Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, signed last summer, included options to acquire hundreds of millions of additional doses.
Biden touted that his administration also worked with Johnson & Johnson — whose vaccine was authorized in late February — and Merck to have the two companies cooperate on expanding manufacturing of the J&J vaccine.
The president said there would be enough vaccines available for all adults in the country by the end of May, which is sooner than expected when he took office. But Biden’s remark leaves the misleading impression the previous administration hadn’t also embarked on a path to secure vaccine supply for all Americans.
Vaccines at Retail Pharmacies
In ticking off his administration’s accomplishments, Biden also said, “We’ve made it possible for you to get a vaccine at nearly any one of 10,000 pharmacies across the country, just like you get your flu shot.” Again, he is taking too much credit.
The Biden administration has made it possible to get vaccines at pharmacies — but not without the advance planning of the past two administrations.
On Sept. 16, the Trump administration announced a COVID-19 vaccination distribution plan, which included an “interim playbook” developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for distributing future vaccines. In the “COVID-19 Vaccination Program Interim Playbook for Jurisdiction Operations,” the CDC said it would use retail pharmacies to administer vaccines to the general population. As of Oct. 29, 12 major retail chains with over 35,000 store locations “have signed on to participate,” including Walgreens, CVS Health Corporation, Walmart Stores Inc. (including Sam’s Club) and Rite Aid, among others, the CDC document said.
CVS Health, for example, signed two memorandums of understanding in October with the Trump administration — “one for federal government’s Long-Term Care Vaccine program and one for the Federal Retail Pharmacy Program” — outlining the terms and conditions it needed to meet to receive vaccines, Joe Goode, senior director of corporate communications at CVS Health, told us.
As for getting the vaccines to pharmacies, the Trump administration announced in August that the McKesson Corporation would serve as the “central distributor of future COVID-19 vaccines.” McKesson will deliver vaccines to a designated location, many of which will be sites where the vaccines will be administered, the Trump administration said at the time.
But the Trump administration would not have been able to execute that agreement without the advance planning of the Obama administration.
The McKesson Corporation is “the same distributor that managed the federally coordinated H1N1 influenza pandemic vaccine campaign,” when Barack Obama was president and Biden was vice president, as explained by the Congressional Research Service. The Obama administration signed a contract with McKesson in 2016 that included “an option for the distribution of vaccines in the event of a pandemic,” Trump’s Department of Health and Human Services said at the time. 
“CDC is drawing on its years of planning and cooperation with state and local public health partners to ensure a safe, effective, and life-saving COVID-19 vaccine is ready to be distributed following FDA approval,” then-CDC Director Robert Redfield said.
So, yes, it’s true that Biden recently announced the first phase of the Federal Retail Pharmacy Program, which initially will allow the public to receive vaccinations at more than 9,000 pharmacy locations and ultimately at more than 40,000 locations. But that was “made possible” by more than just the Biden administration.
Vaccinations Goal
Biden also promoted his administration’s record on administering vaccinations.
Biden, March 11: I said I intended to get a hundred million shots in people’s arms in my first hundred days in office. Tonight, I can say we’re not only going to meet that goal, we’re going to beat that goal because we’re actually on track to reach this goal of a hundred million shots in arms on my 60th day in office. No other country in the world has done this. None.
He’s right that his administration is on track to reach his goal of 100 million total vaccinations ahead of schedule. But, as we wrote last month, the U.S. — even before Biden took office — was virtually already on pace to administer that many additional vaccine doses in his first 100 days.
On the day Biden was inaugurated, the U.S. administered more than 1.5 million shots, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s COVID Data Tracker. On that day, the seven-day average for the previous week was 990,243 shots a day.
By Biden’s second day in office, the seven-day average was at the 1 million doses per day average needed to meet his 100-day goal.
According to CDC data, the Biden administration would reach his goal of 100 million vaccinations on or shortly after his 60th day as president.
In addition, the U.S. will almost certainly be the first country to get to 100 million COVID-19 vaccinations, as Biden said. But the U.S. — which is the third most populous nation — is not the world leader in vaccinations per capita.
Looking at Our World in Data figures for total vaccination doses administered per capita for countries with a population of at least 1 million, Israel leads the world, with 106.05 doses per 100 people as of March 11. The U.S. ranks sixth at 29.67 doses per 100 people,as it is also behind the United Arab Emirates (64.78 doses per 100 people), the United Kingdom (35.95 doses per 100 people), Chile (32.09 doses per 100 people) and Bahrain (30.58 doses per 100 people).
COVID-19 Deaths Comparison
As he has done before, Biden compared the number of people who have been lost to COVID-19 to the number of people who died in certain U.S. wars. 
“So I’ve told you before, I carry a card in my pocket with the number of Americans who have died from COVID to date,” the president said. “It’s on the back of my schedule. As of now, total deaths in America, 527,726. That’s more deaths than in World War I, World War II, the Vietnam War and 9/11 combined.”
But, as the Washington Post Fact Checker has noted, Biden’s math is off, based on available data. 
Combined, there were at least 580,135 total deaths in the three wars that Biden mentioned, according to a Congressional Research Service report updated in July 2020. And the total rises to over 583,000 deaths when adding in the nearly 3,000 who died in the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.
That’s more than the 527,726 deaths from COVID-19 that Biden mentioned in his remarks.
The president would have been on point if he had referred only to U.S. “combat” deaths in the two World Wars and the Vietnam War — which total 392,393 deaths. That’s what the White House previously told the Post’s Fact Checker that Biden meant to say.
Of course, the reported number of deaths from COVID-19 may be an undercount because it does not include deaths attributed to other causes or individuals who died from the disease but were never diagnosed.


Also, the CDC and others currently forecast that U.S. deaths from COVID-19 will continue to increase through at least April. The CDC estimates a total of between 547,000 and 571,000 COVID-19 deaths by April 3.
So, Biden’s comparison — even based on total war deaths, including deaths in and out of battle — could be accurate at some point in the near future.
The president’s larger point – that the death toll has been high – is accurate.
Editor’s note: FactCheck.org does not accept advertising. We rely on grants and individual donations from people like you. Please consider a donation. Credit card donations may be made through our “Donate” page. If you prefer to give by check, send to: FactCheck.org, Annenberg Public Policy Center, 202 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA 19104.
In his March 30 appearance on “Fox & Friends,” President Donald Trump suggested an estimate that the novel coronavirus might kill a huge number of Americans was a new revelation.
The president said in the interview that “the answer” to his question about how many people could die if the U.S. did nothing to combat the new coronavirus “came in yesterday through” Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator. “[I]f we just kept the business as usual, didn’t do anything to stop it or impede it, could have been 2.2 million people could have died.”
But that frightening possibility had been public knowledge for more than two weeks. The number was contained in a report issued by Imperial College London on March 16.
What’s more, the lead author of the report, epidemiology professor Neil Ferguson, told the New York Times that the British researchers had shared their projections with a White House task force a week before and had sent an early copy of the report to the White House.
Birx herself referenced the British report at a coronavirus task force press briefing on March 16, when the Trump administration announced that it would issue more restrictive social distancing guidelines. Birx said the White House task force — working with groups in the U.K. and drawing on “new information coming out from a model” — recommended limiting gatherings to fewer than 10 people. The Trump administration’s recommendations were consistent with the British report made public that same day.
Projections of possible deaths from COVID-19, Imperial College study, March 16
 

And the British report was not the first indication that the coronavirus death toll could be quite high if the disease were left unchecked.
On March 13, the New York Times reported that officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and epidemic experts from around the world had gathered on a conference call the previous month to explore worst-case scenarios for the coronavirus’ toll. The CDC modeled four scenarios and estimated that 200,000 to 1.7 million U.S. residents could die, the Times reported.
Yet, Trump portrayed the potential death toll as new information on March 29, when he announced that he was extending the federal social distancing guidelines until April 30. Previously he had expressed an interest in relaxing them sooner as way to revive the struggling U.S. economy, saying on March 24 that he would “love to have the country opened up and just raring to go by Easter,” April 12. 
At the White House briefing at which he announced the extension, Trump also cited the 2.2 million potential casualty figure — an estimate he said he had been seeking for “a long time.”
Trump, March 29: I just want to reiterate, because a lot of people have been asking, “Well, what would have happened if we did nothing? Did nothing — we just rode it out.”
And I’ve been asking that question to Tony and Deborah, and they’ve been talking to me about it for a long time. Other people have been asking that question. And I think we got our most accurate study today, or certainly most comprehensive.
Think of the number: 2.2 — potentially 2.2 million people if we did nothing. If we didn’t do the distancing, if we didn’t do all of the things that we’re doing.
With social distancing remaining in place, Trump said he hoped to severely limit the number of deaths.
“If we can hold that down, as we’re saying, to 100,000 — that’s a horrible number — maybe even less, but to 100,000; so we have between 100- and 200,000 — we all, together, have done a very good job,” he said.
In an appearance on CNN’s “State of the Union” on March 29, Fauci said that even with mitigation efforts that have been put into effect, 100,000 to 200,000 Americans could die from the disease.
Trump struck a very different tone at a Fox News virtual town hall on March 24, when he was still talking about reopening the country by Easter.
Trump, March 24: Well, you have to make the decision. Look, we lose thousands — I brought some numbers here. We lose thousands and thousands of people a year to the flu. We don’t turn the country off — I mean, every year. Now, when I heard the number — you know we average 37,000 people a year. Can you believe that? And actually, this year we’re having a bad flu season. But we lose thousands of people a year to the flu. We never turn the country off. We lose much more than that to automobile accidents. We didn’t call up the automobile companies and say, “Stop making cars. We don’t want any cars anymore.” We have to get back to work.
This was more than a week after news reports about the British report and the CDC’s worst-case scenarios for coronavirus.
According to CDC statistics on March 30, there have been 140,904 cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, in the U.S., and 2,405 deaths.
In addition to warning against social gatherings with more than 10 people, the federal guidelines urge Americans not to eat at restaurants or go to bars, to steer clear of discretionary travel, and to frequently wash their hands for 20 seconds. While the guidelines are voluntary, many state and local governments have implemented stricter limits. Until Trump extended them, the federal guidelines were set to expire March 31.
On December 21, the United Kingdom called for a meeting as the new rapidly-spreading COVID-19 variant, known as N501Y, is spreading across London and south-east England. Susan Hopkins of Public Health England said that the new virus strain could be 70 percent more transmissible while saying this was an initial figure. In context to the spreading of new coronavirus variant, a post on the second wave of coronavirus pandemic has gone viral on social media. The post says about coronavirus lockdown enforced in various parts of Europe as a precautionary measure against the second wave of coronavirus.The Logical Indian received the message for Fact Check on its Whatsapp number +91 6364000343. 
Facebook user, Rama Murthy also shared the same post.Many other users are also sharing the post on Facebook. 
Many Twitter handles also shared similar posts of lockdown announced in various countries of Europe to prevent the second wave of coronavirus.Spain has declared an emergency extendable until March'21
UK announced one-month lockdown
France-2 weeks,
Germany-4 weeks,
Italy also to follow shortly.
All these countries have confirmed that 2nd wave is more deadly than the first.We have to b very careful&take all precautions.— Ravi Sinha (@ravisinha_86) December 21, 2020Claim: Countries in Europe, (Italy, Spain, France, Germany and United Kingdom) have imposed lockdown.Fact Check:Fact Check 1: Spain has declared an emergency extendable until (March 2021)The Logical Indian found out an article published on India.Com, published on October 26, 2020. The article reported, 'Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez has declared a state of emergency to curb the second wave of coronavirus pandemic.' The report further said that however, the state of emergency won't be as strict as announced on March 14, 2020. It also said that the borders of Spain will also remain open.ABC News reported on October 30, "Spain's parliament has voted to keep the country's state of emergency in place until May 2021 to try to rein in the resurging coronavirus pandemic." The Parliament of Spain took this decision after the coronavirus cases in Spain crossed the mark of 1 million with over 35,000 fatalities.Fact Check 2: UK - announced (one-month) lockdown:National Herald reported on November 1 that Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of Britain announced the imposition of lockdown for one-month starting from November 5. The restrictions were announced after the cases in Britain surged past 1 million.The Sun reported that Britain has come out of the lockdown on December 2. Despite, the lockdown came to end, a three-tier-restrictions were imposed across Britain so that people can enjoy Christmas season with precautions. Boris Johnson said, "These restrictions will be imposed in Spring when most people who need the vaccine will be able to get it."Fact Check 3: France announced lockdown for 2 weeks:NDTV reported on October 29, 2020 that French President, Emmanuel Macron announce imposition of lockdown till December 1. The same article quoted Macron who said, 'Curfew for Paris and other major cities were imposed two weeks ago but failed to curb second waive of coronavirus."On December 21, 2020, The Times Of India reported on coronavirus sitiuarion in France and said: The coronavirus restrictions were eased in the country and the national authorities have replaced it with a general night curfew from 8 pm to 6 am to prevent a surge in Covid-19 cases during the holiday celebrations. The report also stated that the peak of the second Covid-19 outbreak in France is believed to have been reached on November 7, when nearly 87,000 fresh cases were detected in a day.Hence, currently, France is under night curfew and not a complete lockdown as earlier.Fact Check 4: Germany announced Lockdown for 4 weeks:On December 13, BBC reported, Germany is to go into a hard lockdown over the Christmas period as the number of deaths and infections from the coronavirus reaches record levels. German Chancellor, Angela Merkel announced lockdown between 16 December to 10 January to tackle with the rising coronavirus cases in Germany.Business Standard reported, Merkel and the state leaders will consult again on January 5, 2021, to decide on measures for the next stage of lockdown.Fact Check 5: Italy to announce lockdownA report by France 24 published on December 19, said, "Italy imposes lockdown over Christmas and New Year to curb spread of Covid-19."Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte on December 18 announced the closure of shops, bars and restaurants and banned travel between regions.BBC reported, Red Zone restrictions will be imposed on Italy on 24 to 27 December, 31 December to 3 January, and 5 to 6 January. Under the restriction people can leave the house only for reasons of work, necessity and health.Below are the graphs of France, UK, Italy, Germany and Spain to show the number of coronavirus cases reported daily. (Source: Worldometer) 

 

 

 

 
Based on the graphs we can see that the cases of coronavirus have decreased in France, Italy and Spain but the cases are on surge in United Kingdom and Germany.As most of the restrictions are still imposed in all the five countries mentioned in the viral message, hence, the viral message is partially true.Contributors Suggest CorrectionEditor : Bharat Nayak, Creatives : Abhishek MWrite Feedbackcoronavirus Italy Germany France United Kingdom Spain COVID-19 Fact Check FacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkoo
16 years ago, an episode of "The Simpsons" predicted that Donald Trump would be the president of the United States.  In the midst of the frenzy that the Coronavirus outbreak has generated, a rumour started circulating on social media that the long-running sitcom "The Simpsons" had "predicted" this outbreak in 1993.The Simpsons scares me. This episode aired 27 years ago in 1993 🤯 #CoronaVirus pic.twitter.com/Zc0XUZn5PO— 𝒂𝒔𝒉 𝒊𝒏 𝒕𝒉𝒊𝒔 𝒃𝒊𝒕𝒄𝒉 (@ashakiiii) January 30, 2020The stills are believed to be taken from a 1993 episode, where there is an illness creating chaos.
In the fourth season of The Simpsons, in an episode "Marge in Chains," a news report announces fears of the "Osaka Flu."In another scene, a visibly infected Japanese factory worker coughs into a package, which is then sent to the United States. Most of the residents of Springfield get sick as a result. This narrative seems to suggest "The Simpsons" somehow knew about the spread of the respiratory illness 27 years ago.         View this post on Instagram            A post shared by Tom Felton (@t22felton) on Mar 4, 2020 at 6:34pm PST
Aaaaaaaand the Simpsons predicted corona virus pic.twitter.com/8I2Rq1DbuM— SalmayneYo (@young_salvatore) March 3, 2020
Simpson predictions from 1993 season 4 episode 21..wow Corona virus😞 pic.twitter.com/QDvcliJQOW— ACE21 (@AceLomavatu) March 5, 2020Don't know how they do it, but The Simpsons are always on point with the predictions (i.e. 9/11, trump, Corona Virus, etc). #Crazy pic.twitter.com/ix3vi76WB6— Ä-LEX-ANDER THE GREAT (@LEXercise) March 4, 2020
Claim:
 Simpsons predicted Coronavirus outbreak long ago.  Fact Check:  The first three panels of the viral image going counter clock-wise (i.e., all but the bottom-right panel) are original. These are taken from the 1993 episode (Season 4, Episode 21) entitled "Marge in Chains."
The episode shows the residents of Springfield dealing with an outbreak of "Osaka Flu," which spreads after a factory worker coughs into a box.
The video shows the 3 stills in this episode.The fourth panel (bottom right), however, is doctored and actually comes from a different episode of "The Simpsons."
That panel, featuring Springfield reporter Kent Brockman, is from the episode "The Fool Monty" (Season 22, Episode 6). The words "Corona Virus" are morphed on top of this image, which originally read "Apocalypse Meow."
Although the 1993 episode of "The Simpsons" did focus on a viral outbreak, this can't be termed as a prediction.
 "The Simpsons" was in all probabilities commenting on past events like the Spanish Flu, the Hong Kong Flu, and the Asian Flu and not making future predictions. If you have any news that you believe needs to be fact-checked, please email us at factcheck@thelogicalindian.com or WhatsApp at 6364000343Also Read: 'No Handshake, Only Namaste': Israeli PM Advises Citizens Amidst Coronavirus Outbreak  Contributors Suggest CorrectionEditor : Bharat Nayak, By : Aditi ChattopadhyayWrite Feedbacksimpsons coronavirus FacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkoo
A graphic has been going around which claims that 'cybercriminals' are going to launch a 'phishing attack' from June 21 onwards. 
The message goes onto say that the suspicious email could be 'ncov2019@gov.in'
"The cybercriminals are claiming to have 2 million individual/citizen's email IDs and are planning to send emails with the subject 'Free COVID-19 testing' inciting personal details," reads the viral graphic.According to the message, the following cities are at risk from this phishing campaign: Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Chennai and Ahmedabad.The Logical Indian received several requests to authenticate the claim.  

 

 
Claim:
A phishing attack is expected to be launched from June 21 onwards in major metropolitan cities of the country.Fact Check:The claim is true.According to an NDTV report, the government has cautioned people regarding a massive phishing attack that could seem like an official communique on the COVID-19 pandemic. The intention of the attack is to steal personal data and financial details.The phishing attack campaign by "malicious actors" was expected to start on June 21, and the suspicious email could be ncov2019@gov.in, the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team or CERT-In had tweeted on their official Twitter account.CERT-In issued advisory on COVID 19-related Phishing Attack Campaign by Malicious Actors. pic.twitter.com/x8WO3TseCM— CERT-In (@IndianCERT) June 20, 2020The CERT-In under the Information Technology Ministry is tasked with protecting Indians from cyber threats.
"The phishing campaign is expected to use malicious emails under the pretext of local authorities in charge of dispensing government-funded COVID-19 support initiatives. Such emails are designed to drive recipients towards fake websites where they are deceived into downloading malicious files or entering personal and financial information," CERT-In said in a statement."...The malicious actors are claiming to have two million individual/citizen email IDs and are planning to send emails with the subject free COVID-19 testing for all residents of Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Chennai and Ahmedabad, inciting them to provide personal information," it added."...These malicious actors are planning to spoof or create fake email IDs impersonating various authorities. The email ID expected to be used for the phishing campaign towards Indian individuals and businesses is expected to be from email such as 'ncov2019@gov.in' and the attack campaign is expected to start on June 21, 2020," it said.Below is the entire statement:
What Is A Phishing Attack?Phishing is one of the oldest forms of cyberattack that uses disguised email as a weapon. The goal is to hoodwink the email recipient into believing that the message is something they want or need. It could be a request from their bank or a note from someone in their company.What Are The Steps You Can Take For Protection?According to cybersecurity agency, people must not open attachments in unsolicited emails, even if they come from known contacts. One must not click on URLs in an unsolicited email, even if the link seems benign.Any unusual activity or attack should be reported immediately at incident@cert-in.org.in with logs and email headers for analysis of the attacks and for taking action.Below is a screenshot of the full list of recommendation issued by the Government: 
According to researchers at CYFIRMA, a cybersecurity firm that provides threat visibility and vulnerability assessment solutions for enterprises, an investigation into the Lazarus Group, a known hacker group sponsored by North Korea, for many years have revealed detailed plans indicating an upcoming global phishing campaign.
"There is a common thread across six targeted nations in multiple continents – the governments of these countries have announced significant fiscal support to individuals and businesses in their effort to stabilize their pandemic-ravaged economies," reads the report. The aim of the Lazarus Group's upcoming phishing campaign is to impersonate government agencies, departments, and trade associations who are tasked to oversee the disbursement of the financial aid.In order to execute their plan, the hackers plan to capitalize on these announcements to lure vulnerable individuals and companies into falling for the phishing attacks.Below is a screenshot of what the email could look like: 
However, the govt does mention a disclaimer that the information provided on the website is on an 'as is' basis and does not come with a warranty.Further, India's biggest lender State Bank of India (SBI) had also tweeted and issued a public warning to its account holders to be cautious of a cyber attack that could hurt almost 2 million people if not more. Attention! It has come to our notice that a cyber attack is going to take place in major cities of India. Kindly refrain yourself from clicking on emails coming from ncov2019@gov.in with a subject line Free COVID-19 Testing. pic.twitter.com/RbZolCjLMW— State Bank of India (@TheOfficialSBI) June 21, 2020If you have any news that you believe needs to be fact-checked, please email us at factcheck@thelogicalindian.com or WhatsApp at 6364000343
  Also Read: Fact Check: PIB 'Fact Check' Erroneously Debunks UP STF Advisory To Uninstall 52 Chinese Apps As Fake Contributors Suggest CorrectionWriter : Aditi Chattopadhyay, Editor : Bharat Nayak, Creatives : Abhishek MWrite FeedbackPhishing attack Govt order cyber attack FacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkoo
Coronavirus cases in India have crossed 9.5 lakh and total deaths have crossed 1.39 lakh mark according to the Worldometer data. At a time when various pharmaceutical companies are racing towards finding a vaccine, Health Secretary, Rajesh Bhushan said that the government never spoke about vaccinating the entire nation. News agency ANI reported about Rajesh Bhushan making a statement that the government never announced about vaccinating the entire nation. His statement came when he was asked about the duration that will be taken to vaccinate the entire population of the nation.


Claim: Government of India never spoke about vaccinating the entire population of the country.Fact Check:During the election campaign of Bihar Assembly polls 2020, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, on October 22, said that people of Bihar will get the free coronavirus vaccine as soon as it is available if BJP comes in power. She said, "As soon as COVID-19 vaccine will be available for production at a mass scale, every person in Bihar will get free vaccination. This is the first promise mentioned in our poll manifesto."BJP was criticized for politicizing coronavirus vaccine. Party's IT Cell head, Amit Malviya, came to rescue by explaining what Sitharaman meant by her statement. He said, "BJP's manifesto promises free COVID vaccine. Like all programs, the centre will provide vaccines to states at a nominal rate. It is for the state Govts to decide if they want to give it free or otherwise. Health is a state subject, Bihar BJP has decided to give it free. Simple." 
After the announcement of free coronavirus vaccine distribution in Bihar, states like Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka Tamil Nadu and Puducherry also announced free vaccines to all.Prime Minister Narendra Modi also in his address to the nation announced free vaccine to all.On October 20, 2020, Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his address to the nation said that the government will ensure every citizen gets coronavirus vaccine once it is available. He in his speech said, "Bharat mai abhi corona ki kai vaccine par kaam chal raha hai. In me kuch advanced stage par hai. Saathiyo, corona ki vaccine jab bhi aayegi, woh jald se jald pratyek Bhartiya tak kaise pahunche, iske liye bhi sarkar ki taiyari jaari rahegi, ek ek nagrik tak vaccine pahunche iske liye teji se kaam ho raha hai. (The work on coronavirus vaccine is currently going in India, some of which are in advanced stages. Friends, whenever the vaccine is made, it will be made available to each Indian, the government is preparing swiftly to ensure that every citizen can access the vaccine)."I an interview to The Economic Times on November 31, 2020, when Prime Minister Narendra Modi was asked about the distribution of vaccine, he reiterated that vaccine will be provided of every Indian once it is released. He mentioned that none will be left behind. "First and foremost, I would like to assure the nation that, as and when a vaccine becomes available, everyone will be vaccinated. None will be left. Of course, initially, we may focus on protecting the most vulnerable and frontline workers. A National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID-19 Vaccine has been constituted to chart the way forward," the PM had said.
Hence, though the Health Secretary denied, the government of India has said that the coronavirus vaccine will be provided to each and every individual of the country.Scientifically the vaccine is not essential to be given to everyone. According to the statement made by the Director-General of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Balram Bhargava, "vaccinating the entire population may not be required if 'critical mass of people' is vaccinated and the chain of virus transmission is broken".If you have any news that you believe needs to be fact-checked, please email us at factcheck@thelogicalindian.com or WhatsApp at 6364000343. Also Read: Fact Check: The Viral Image Of Farmer Injured During Protest Is Not Of Captain PPS Dhillon (Retd.)Contributors Suggest CorrectionWriter : Yusha Rahman, Editor : Bharat Nayak, Creatives : RajathWrite FeedbackCoronavirus COVID-19 Health secretary Fact Check FacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkoo
Glenmark Pharmaceuticals on Saturday announced the launch of its antiviral drug Favipiravir, to treat mild to moderate COVID-19 cases in India.
Amid this, social media was abuzz with various claims surrounding 'Favipiravir'. 
Below are some of the claims: 

 
The Logical Indian received multiple requests on its Fact check number to authenticate the various claims. 
Claim:
Glenmark Pharmaceuticals received approvals from Drug Controller General of India to manufacture and market Favipiravir, an anti-viral drug, to treat COVID-19 patients.Fact Check:The claim is true.Backed by clinical evidence and after the evaluation of data and in consultation with the Subject Expert Committee, the Mumbai-based firm received the manufacturing and marketing approval from India's drug regulator on Friday, June 19.The drug will be available as a prescription-based medication for Rs 103/tablet, with recommended doses being 1800 mg twice daily on day 1, followed by 800 mg twice daily up to day 14.
FavipiravirDiscovered by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd. in Japan, Favipiravir was initially approved for therapeutic use in resistant cases of influenza. In 2014, favipiravir was approved in Japan to treat cases of influenza that were unresponsive to conventional treatment. Owing to its efficiency at targetting several strains of influenza, it has been investigated in other countries to treat novel viruses including Ebola and most recently, COVID-19.It is currently being tested in 18 clinical trials for COVID-19 and results from two studies have shown a positive outcome, while data from other trials are awaited.The list of the ongoing clinical trials with this drug can be accessed here.Below is the press release by Glenmark Pharmaceuticals:
Mode Of Action Of Favipiravir The genetic material of a Virus is either DNA-based or RNA-based. Favipiravir works exclusively on RNA viruses.Favipiravir works by preventing the virus from making copies of itself once it gets inside a host cell. This is done by targetting a key protein enzyme that the virus uses to multiply its genetic material (RNA) inside the body, called RNA polymerase. According to a study conducted on 80 subjects, Favipiravir, compared to lopinavir/ritonavir, showed quicker clearance of the virus. The results showed that 91 per cent of the participants had better CT scans after treatment. However, it must be mentioned that the study wasn't randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled which is a trial format required to make a stronger argument for the drug's effectiveness.According to Glenmark, Favipiravir shows clinical improvements of up to 88 per cent in COVID-19, with a rapid reduction in viral load by four days. What Studies Have Been Cited By Glenmark?Glenmark cited four studies in its press release, two from China and one reach from Russia and Japan. One of the studies conducted on 80 patients in China studied the efficacy of Favipiravir as opposed to anti-retroviral drugs Lopinavir and Ritonavir. Favipiravir treatment led to a quicker reduction in viral load compared to the other drugs. In the second Chinese study, 236 patients were enrolled.Compared to Umifenovir, another antiviral drug, Favipiravir showed a better rate of clinical recovery on the seventh day. It also led to a quicker relief from fever and cough. The observational study in Japan conducted with 2,141 patients with mild to moderate symptoms showed clinical improvement using Favipiravir.If you have any news that you believe needs to be fact-checked, please email us at factcheck@thelogicalindian.com or WhatsApp at 6364000343 Also Read: Fact Check: Did Tanzania Find Herbal Cure For COVID-19? Contributors Suggest CorrectionEditor : Bharat Nayak, Creatives : Abhishek MWrite FeedbackGlenmark Pharmaceuticals Drug Controller General of India Favipiravir Anti-viral COVID-19 Drugs FacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkoo
A complaint was registered against a person in a quarantine centre in Uttar Pradesh's Kushinagar district on April 13 for allegedly refusing to eat food cooked by a Dalit village head at a quarantine centre, police said.According to an NDTV report, the man was identified as Seraj Ahmad from Bhujouli Khurd village of the district, is housed at a quarantine centre set up in a primary school in the village along with four others.The police informed that Ahmad returned to the village from Delhi on March 29 and has been staying in the quarantine centre since then.The village head, Lilawati Devi, who is a Dalit, went to the quarantine centre and prepared food for the five people lodged there due to the cook's absence on April 10. However, Ahmad refused to have the food cooked by her.Reportedly, Devi informed the Sub-Divisional Magistrate Deshdeepak Singh and Block Development Officer Ramakant regarding the incident. She subsequently lodged a police complaint on April 12.R K Yadav, the Station House Officer (SHO) of Khadda police station said a case has been filed against Ahmad under the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.Also Read: Bengaluru: Hate Campaign In The Face Of Coronavirus Outbreak Triggers AttackContributors Suggest CorrectionEditor : Shubhendu Deshmukh, By : Aditi ChattopadhyayWrite FeedbackUP Dalit Untouchability Quarantine FacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkooFacebookTwitterWhatsappTelegramLinkedinEmailPrintkoo
By Reuters Fact Check6 Min ReadRefiling to include final line of text with link to Reuters Fact Check ‘about us’ page.A widely shared Facebook post has claimed COVID-19 vaccines do not prevent a person from catching or transmitting the disease, arguing this means “there is no difference” between those who are vaccinated and those who are not. This is not true. Current evidence suggests approved COVID-19 vaccines give people significantly greater protection against the illness.The Facebook image has been shared over a thousand times since it was posted on March 13 and reads: “So let me get this right. They want you to have a passport to prove you’ve been vaccinated. But the vaccine doesn’t stop you getting it or from transmitting it. So there is no difference at all between the vaccinated and the unvaccinated. Vax or no vax, it’s the same. The passport only shows proof of submission.” (here). Comments underneath the post such as “Correct!!!” and “You bet!” indicate other users also believe the claim.PROTECTIONResults from clinical trials of COVID-19 vaccines that have ultimately been approved for use have revealed high efficacy rates – and have also shown positive effects in wider community rollouts.For example, preliminary analysis of the UK, Brazil and South Africa trials of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab found it reached an 82% efficacy rate against symptomatic disease after two doses (here).Meanwhile, Pfizer/BioNTech said its vaccine reaches 95% efficacy (here) and Moderna results reach 94.1% (here).Both AstraZeneca and Moderna have also reported a 100% rate of protection against severe effects of COVID-19, while Pfizer said ten severe cases of the disease were reported in its phase III trial – nine of which were in the placebo group and just one in the vaccine group (here, here).Data from Israel, which has conducted the fastest vaccination campaign having inoculated more than half its population of 9 million (here), shows largely declining numbers of new COVID-19 cases, along with fewer critically ill patients and deaths (here). The country has now begun to relax its strict measures (here).In the United Kingdom, which has also conducted a fast vaccine rollout, similar patterns are being seen with declining numbers of deaths and severe cases of the disease (here).TRANSMISSIONScientists say more research will be needed to determine the extent to which COVID-19 vaccines prevent transmission; however, public health experts at the Meedan Digital Health Lab say early data shows positive signs (here).Research company The Advisory Board also flagged a working paper in the Lancet medical journal on Feb. 22 that assessed thousands of COVID-19 screenings among healthcare workers in England, including unvaccinated staff and staff who received the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine (here). The results suggested that vaccinated healthcare workers were four times less likely to develop asymptomatic COVID-19, according to co-leader of the study Mike Weekes, an infectious disease specialist at Cambridge University (here).The Advisory Board also highlighted a pre-published paper from the Israeli Health Ministry that found the Pfizer vaccine appeared to reduce all coronavirus infections, including asymptomatic infection, by 89.4% and symptomatic infections by 93.7%.Another preprint study by Harvard epidemiologists Marc Lipsitch and Rebecca Kahn published on Feb. 28 estimated from Moderna’s data that "one dose of vaccine reduces the potential for transmission by at least 61%, possibly considerably more" (here).In an opinion piece for The Daily Beast on Feb. 16, Johns Hopkins epidemiologists Kate Grabowski and Justin Lessler responded to social media users about the worthiness of the vaccine. They wrote: “We are confident vaccination against COVID-19 reduces the chances of transmitting the virus” and said it would be “beyond shocking if no impact was there” (here).VERDICTMissing context. Current data from clinical trials and community rollouts of approved COVID-19 vaccines show people who get the jabs have significantly greater protection against the disease.This article was produced by the Reuters Fact Check team. Read more about our fact-checking work here .Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
By Reuters Fact Check4 Min ReadA Facebook post suggesting multiple schools in Florida have stopped hiring teachers based on their COVID-19 vaccination status is misleading, while a further claim of vaccine “shedding” is false.The post, from May 2, has been shared hundreds of times and appears to be a screenshot taken from another account. It reads: “Florida schools now won’t employ teachers that have had the maxine [sic] due to shedding. Looks like the tables have started to turn.” (here)Despite the post’s suggestion, just one school in Florida has expressed such a policy. The Centner Academy in Miami, a private facility run by a husband-and-wife team, has been widely criticised for the move, which has also had its legal basis questioned (here).“It is our policy, to the extent possible, not to employ anyone who has taken the experimental COVID-19 injection until further information is known,” reads a letter sent to parents that was posted to Instagram by the school’s co-founder Leila Centner (here). “This was not an easy decision to make. We made this decision with several doctors who are on the front line investigating the reported issues as described below. It was a consensus from our advisors that until this topic is investigated more thoroughly, it is in the best interests of the children to protect them from the unknown implications of being in close proximity for the entire day with a teacher who has very recently taken the COVID-19 injection.”Citing an example, Centner says there are “tens of thousands of women” reporting “adverse reproductive issues from being in close proximity with those who have received any one of the COVID-19 injections”.She adds: “No one knows exactly what may be causing these irregularities, but it appears that those who have received the injections may be transmitting something from their bodies to those with whom they come in contact.”Centner’s comments refer to the concept of “shedding”, which was frequently used in the early days of the pandemic to describe people transmitting or emitting coronavirus particles. However, experts have told Reuters that people cannot “shed” COVID-19 vaccines (here).“This is a conspiracy that has been created to weaken trust in a series of vaccines that have been demonstrated in clinical trials to be safe and effective,” said Dr Christopher Zahn, Vice President for Practice Activities at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, the leading United States organisation for medical professionals in women’s healthcare.Speaking to Reuters on a previous article, Zahn said the vaccines were “our single best tool for confronting a global pandemic that has taken 600,000 lives in this country [the U.S.] alone”. He added that “such conspiracies and false narratives are dangerous and have nothing to do with science”.Meanwhile, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) told Reuters: “There is no way for a COVID-19 vaccinated person to ‘shed vaccine’ […] COVID-19 vaccines do not use the live virus that causes COVID-19 and cannot cause COVID-19. Therefore, people who receive a COVID-19 vaccine cannot shed the virus or the vaccine.”VERDICTPartly false. Only one school in Florida has said it will temporarily avoid hiring teachers who have had the vaccine, citing vaccine shedding as a reason. However, experts have told Reuters it is not possible for people to “shed” COVID-19 vaccines.This article was produced by the Reuters Fact Check team. Read more about our fact-checking work  here .  Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
By Reuters Fact Check5 Min ReadThousands of students have this month descended on Miami Beach, Florida, for spring break from their U.S. colleges and universities, leading the city to extend its 8 p.m. curfew and emergency powers for up to three weeks. Images on social media show people flouting federal guidance to avoid large crowds and to wear masks to stop the spread of the novel coronavirus. One photo that has gained traction, showing a swarm of people on the beach, is from 2019’s spring break, a year before the COVID-19 pandemic began sweeping the globe, claiming more than 2.8 million lives.Examples of the photo being shared can be seen here , here , here , here ,Those posting the photo of people crowded together and commenting on it seem to believe it is from 2021, with one poster saying “I’m glad I live 1,500 miles from Miami Beach” and another referring to the city’s curfew extension.The original photo was published by the South Florida Sun Sentinel and credited to the Miami Beach Police on March 22, 2019 with the caption “Spring Break crowds gathered at Eighth Street beach in Miami Beach last weekend.” The large numbers of people who congregated at the famous party spot prompted Miami Beach to “take a more aggressive strategy” in managing spring break crowds long before the United States was ravaged by the coronavirus (here).One popular poster, podcaster Fernand R. Amandi (here) , posted a clarification when people on social media pointed out the date discrepancy. He also posted a reply to his original tweet saying that “it has come to my attention that the picture in the original tweet isn’t from this week, but that does not change the fact that Miami Beach has been overrun by thousands of maskless Spring Breakers who are not abiding by the CDC pandemic guidelines as these recent photos confirm.”Video posted by the Miami Herald on March 22, 2021 shows a thick maskless crowd at a different part of Eighth Street until they are dispersed by police spraying pepper spray (here) . The Miami Herald reported the area “has been jam-packed with partiers in recent weeks.” In a Reuters slideshow people stand closely together, with only some wearing masks during Spring Break (here ).The Centers for Disease Control recommend that people wear masks and stay six feet apart to contain the spread of the coronavirus.Miami Beach Interim City manager Raul Aguila declared a state of emergency on March 20, 2021, imposing a curfew, closing some roads, and temporarily shuttering some sidewalk restaurant seating due to the police department’s “significant concerns relating to larger than expected spring break crowds.” In the declaration, the city also urged some businesses to close voluntarily (here here ).VERDICTPartly false. The photo depicts Miami Beach during Spring Break, but is from 2019. Miami Beach has struggled with large crowds in 2021.This article was produced by the Reuters Fact Check team. Read more about our work to fact-check social media posts here .Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Recent media reports in the United Kingdom have noted the emergence of a “Thai variant” of SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes COVID-19.
 Those reports were based on a May 27 report by Public Health England (PHE), an executive agency sponsored by the U.K. Department of Health and Social Care.
 The PHE report notes that C.36.3 — the SARS-CoV-2 mutation at issue — was designated a Variant Under Investigation on May 24 “on the basis of the mutation profile and increased importation from a widening international area.”
 
 
 
 We've updated our weekly #COVID19 #vaccine surveillance report.The table below summarises the evidence we have to date on vaccine effectiveness against different outcomes.See the report here: https://t.co/hbRwKS6WFg pic.twitter.com/BuC3MTeJCh— Public Health England (@PHE_uk) May 27, 2021
 
 
 
 Approximately 109 cases had been detected in the U.K. at the time of the report’s publication.
 Trouble is, the variant didn’t originate in Thailand, as some news reports suggested. That’s why the Thai prime minister’s P.R. office took to Twitter.
 “The Director-General of the Department of Medical Sciences clarified that there has been some misleading information in the media on the Thai #COVID19 variant found in the UK,” it tweeted.
 
 
 
 The Director-General of the Department of Medical Sciences clarified that there has been some misleading information in the media on the Thai #COVID19 variant found in the UK. pic.twitter.com/Xa4N6JFhwL— PR Thai Government (@prdthailand) May 28, 2021
 
 
 
 The department continued:
 "According to the report from the Public Health England, the C.36.3 variant was detected in Thailand. Nonetheless, Thailand's Ministry of Public Health made it clear that the variant had actually been found in a person who traveled from Egypt while staying in the state quarantine."
 
 
 
 According to the report from the Public Health England, the C.36.3 variant was detected in Thailand. Nonetheless, Thailand's Ministry of Public Health made it clear that the variant had actually been found in a person who traveled from Egypt while staying in the state quarantine.— PR Thai Government (@prdthailand) May 28, 2021
 
 
 
 That statement is true.
 The director of Thailand’s Disease Control Department, Dr. Opart Karnkawinpong, explained the first known host of the C.36.3 variant was an Egyptian man who had traveled to Hong Kong and then Bangkok on January 25, according to Thai PBS, a public broadcasting service in Thailand.
 After testing positive for COVID-19, the man was hospitalized on January 29. Karnkawinpong said that no one in Thailand was reported to have been infected with the C.36.3 variant, and it should therefore be viewed as “imported.”
 That view is consistent with the British PHE report, which noted that the C.36.3 variant was “first detected in sequence from Thailand ex Egypt.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health workers collect nasal swabs from men for coronavirus testing in Bangkok on Tuesday, June 1, 2021. (AP Photo/Sakchai Lalit)
 
 
 
 What’s it all mean? Media reports labeling the variant solely as “Thai” were misleading. And the confusion underscores the dangers of labeling virus variants by geography, something the World Health Organization and experts want to correct.
 It should be noted that some British media reports did state that the variant “was first detected in Thailand in people who had travelled from Egypt,” as reported by Yahoo News UK, The Mirror, The Independent and others. Yet, some, like The Independent, went for a clickbait headline, labeling the newly detected mutation a “Thai variant.”
 The Independent further used misleading language, saying the "new mutant strain … first emerged in Thailand." "Emerged" implies place of origin, and that is unproved.
 
 
 
 #COVID19??Covid news – live: Delay unlocking over Indian variant spread, expert warns, as Thai strain found in UK??FOLLOW LIVEhttps://t.co/htHYRNJLz3— The Independent (@Independent) May 28, 2021
 
 
 
 Researchers in the U.K. have developed a so-called Pango Network, which names versions of SARS-CoV-2 (such as B.1.1.7 and P.1).
 However, that naming system has not been universally adopted. Thai media also have regularly referred to other variants of SARS-CoV-2 by their perceived geographical origins.
 
 
 
 Bangkok Post headlines on Monday: ??S African variant 'hits' Thailand https://t.co/NGiZDaVWha??Chula to develop cheap Covid-19 diagnostics https://t.co/bO8EDW05cm??Cops come under fire for 'attack' on volunteer https://t.co/BKUzk6AXFr #Thailand pic.twitter.com/rJDt2fy0zl— Richard Barrow (@RichardBarrow) February 15, 2021
 
 
 
 Katie Baca, a historian of science and medicine at Harvard University, and Susana Bejar, an internal medicine physician in New York City, have warned against "naming pathogens or diseases as if they have nationalities.”
 For example, B.1.1.7, is commonly referred to as the “U.K. variant” of SARS-CoV-2. The strain was reported as a “variant of concern” on December 14, 2020.
 But Baca and Bejar say that just because the U.K. first detected the B.1.1.7 variant, that “doesn’t mean the variant originated there.” They cite a BBC report that B.1.1.7 may have first been detected in the U.K. thanks to the country’s robust genomic surveillance system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other SARS-CoV-2 strains widely referred to by their supposed place of origin include the B.1.617 strain, first detected in India, and the B.1.351 variant, first detected in South Africa. A variant recently discovered in Vietnam that is believed to be a hybrid of the B.1.1.7 and B.1.617 strains is not being referred to as the Vietnam variant. 
 Some Thai public health officials say the naming conventions around another variant — P.1 — are analogous to those of C.36.3.
 P.1 was first detected in four travelers from Brazil tested at Haneda Airport outside Tokyo, Japan, in January.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Staffs wearing protective masks to help curb the spread of the coronavirus walk in the empty ticketing area at Narita International Airport in Narita, Japan, on Tuesday, June 1, 2021.
 
 
 
 “If the origin [of C.36.3] is from Egypt then it should not be called a Thai variant,” the Thai Enquirer, an English language news website, quoted Supakit Sirilak, Chief of Thailand’s Department of Medical Sciences, as saying. “This is similar to Japan when they found the Brazilian variant. They reported it as the Brazilian strain. Therefore this should be called the Egyptian variant.”
 The Thai government has been blamed for a failed vaccine rollout and “broken pandemic response” amid a recent surge in COVID-19 infections. But the country is not alone in trying to avoid being cast as a virus originator.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India's information technology (IT) ministry has also asked social media firms to scrub all references to an “Indian variant” of SARS-CoV-2 from their platforms.
 “This is completely FALSE. There is no such variant of Covid-19 scientifically cited as such by the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO has not associated the term 'Indian Variant' with the B.1.617 variant of the coronavirus in any of its reports,” Reuters quoted the ministry as stating in a letter to social media firms.
 
 
 
 India is demanding social media remove references to the "Indian variant" of COVID-19. But what should it be called?https://t.co/rKXNpzjKbt— TIME (@TIME) May 27, 2021
 
 
 
 Virus-blaming is setting off international alarms. A study published in the American Journal of Public Health cited a warning from United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres, who cautioned that “the pandemic continues to unleash a tsunami of hate and xenophobia, scapegoating and scare-mongering.”
 According to the study, the WHO has recommended “avoiding terms that connect diseases to countries or specific people … to mitigate this discrimination.”
 In earlier guidelines, the WHO said disease names should “consist of generic descriptive terms” related to symptoms,” as well as “who it affects, its severity or seasonality” and the pathogen which causes the disease, if known. 
 The WHO said disease names should not include geographic locations, including cities, countries, regions, continents; people’s names; species/class of animal or food; cultural, population, industry or occupational references; or terms that incite undue fear.
 
 
 
 Today WHO has announced a new naming system for key #COVID19 variants. The labels are based on the Greek alphabet (i.e. Alpha, Beta, Gamma, etc), making them simple, easy to say and remember.?? https://t.co/aYCZfspZyb pic.twitter.com/Gxt14fwVqF— World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) May 31, 2021
 
 
 
 On May 31, the WHO announced what it called “simple, easy-to-say and remember” labels for SARS-CoV-2 variants of interest and concern.
 Those labels will employ letters from the Greek alphabet.
On March 30, a newly-created Twitter account “StopSerbiaDogWalkingBan” @DogSerbia posted a tweet saying: “In Serbia, the #Covid19 curfew means we can’t walk our dogs for up to 14 hours at a time. It causes so much unnecessary suffering.”
 
 
 
 In Serbia, the #Covid19 curfew means we can’t walk our dogs for up to 14 hours at a time. It causes so much unnecessary suffering. Please help us #StopSerbiaDogWalkingBan!This account is politically neutral & it’s about #animalwelfare. pic.twitter.com/1GvbqP6gIb— StopSerbiaDogWalkingBan (@DogSerbia) March 30, 2020
 
 
 
 The claim is true.
 Two days earlier, the Serbian government announced new stricter nationwide curfew measures in response to the COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic.
 Among the new restrictions: walking back on pet walks.
 “Guided by the expert opinion, the government of the Republic of Serbia has decided to withdraw the decision on the allowed walk of pets for 20 minutes between 20.00 and 21.00” (8 p.m. and 9 p.m.), the announcement read.
 It also extended the 3 p.m.-5 a.m. curfew on weekdays to include the weekends.
 Initially, the Serbian government’s COVID-19 curfew allowed dog-walking for up to 200 meters outside the home and 20 minutes between 8 p.m. and 9 p.m.
 The dog-walking ban outraged Serbian dog owners, the Associated Press reported.
 Serbia’s prominent animal rights groups and veterinarians published an open letter to the president and the government to back off.
 “The decision threatens the dogs’ physical health, and the mental health of their respective owners, which are elevated in a situation of stress,” the letter stated.
 Now, the only exceptions to the curfew apply to people in urgent need of medical assistance and farmers delivering groceries to urban stores.
 Violating the curfew is a criminal offense punishable by a fine of up to 150,000 dinars ($1,406) and/or up to three years in prison.
 Videos tracking dogs walking outside during the curfew hours can be seen posted by the Serbian news channels.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A screenshot from a video posed by the Serbian Telegraf.rs
 
 
 
 According to Johns Hopkins University’s COVID-19 dashboard, Serbia has recorded 785 confirmed coronavirus cases and 16 deaths from the disease by March 30.
People across the globe continue to seek answers on how to defeat the coronavirus that has sickened millions.
 One proposed solution has gained attention in recent weeks: Vitamin D.
 A link between vitamin D and COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, caught the eye of U.S. Rep. Glenn Grothman, R-Glenbeulah. 
 In a May 21, 2020 news release, Grothman encouraged the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to look into vitamin D’s impact on the virus. 
 "Research illustrates a clear correlation between vitamin D deficiencies and (higher) COVID-19 mortality rates," the release said.
 Studies cited by Grothman do suggest vitamin D deficiencies may have contributed to COVID-19 deaths in some countries. But many questions remain about the relationship between the two, and researchers say more work should be done to better understand it.
 Is Grothman right about the correlation?
 Vitamin D and COVID-19 deaths
 Grothman’s news release cited studies out of Northwestern University and Trinity College in Dublin that reached similar conclusions: Countries with more deaths from the virus, such as Spain and Italy, also had higher rates of vitamin D deficiencies. 
 "We saw a significant correlation with vitamin D deficiency," Vadim Backman, a Northwestern professor who helped author one study, told the university website Northwestern Now.
 Why look into vitamin D in the first place?
 Aside from building healthy bones, vitamin D can boost the immune system by suppressing what’s called a cytokine storm — severe inflammation that occurs when the immune system becomes overactive and releases too many cytokine proteins.
 Backman said cytokine storms may contribute to COVID-19 deaths because the storms can damage people’s lungs. An April 17, 2020 article on WebMD also indicated that patients with severe COVID-19 symptoms had high levels of cytokines in their system.
 The idea, then, is that vitamin D could suppress a catastrophic immune response and prevent people from developing severe COVID-19 symptoms that lead to death.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "It will not prevent a patient from contracting the virus, but it may reduce complications and prevent death in those who are infected," Backman said in the interview.
 Let’s return to Grothman.
 He did not say researchers found a connection, only a correlation between vitamin D levels and COVID-19 deaths. That’s on target. Vitamin D is by no means a cure for the virus, and Grothman conceded that we don’t yet know the extent of the relationship.
 In an interview with PolitiFact Wisconsin, Grothman reiterated his belief that federal agencies should further explore the issue. 
 "I think a lot of times, the CDC and (National Institutes of Health) and that crowd primarily focus on new drugs," he said. "If you have something right under your nose, let’s go with it."
 What researchers say
 For now, researchers caution against reading too much into the available studies. 
 J. Wesley Pike, a biochemistry professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, said there is not enough proof yet to suggest a meaningful relationship between vitamin D and COVID-19. Researchers will need to conduct further studies to determine if that vitamin is effective in combating the coronavirus.
 "There’s simply no evidence that taking vitamin D will protect you," Pike said. "But again, we don’t know. The answer is it’s possible." 
 A group of researchers in Europe and the United Kingdom noted in a May 2020 paper that vitamin D supports the immune system and is recommended to help people maintain a healthy lifestyle. People can up their intake and avoid deficiencies through supplements, eating vitamin D-rich food and getting safe sunlight exposure.
 But vitamin D is not a "magic bullet" to prevent or treat COVID-19, they wrote, and should not be taken in excessive doses that could present their own health risks.
 Our ruling
 Grothman claimed "research illustrates a clear correlation between vitamin D deficiencies and (higher) COVID-19 mortality rates."
 Early studies into vitamin D suggests it may curb the severity of COVID-19 symptoms and reduce mortality rates. Further research is needed to examine the issue, and vitamin D is not a cure for the coronavirus. 
 But Grothman did not say it was a cure, only that there was a correlation. One expert noted the correlation was "significant"
 We rate his claim True. 
 See Figure 1 on PolitiFact.com
In April, appearing on "The View," Sen. Kamala Harris called President Donald Trump a "drug pusher" for promoting hydroxychloroquine as a treatment for COVID-19. 
 Hydroxychloroquine is approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat or prevent malaria and to treat autoimmune conditions such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. As we’ve previously reported, the drug is not a cure for COVID-19, and research on whether it could provide relief from symptoms of the disease is inconclusive. In July, the FDA released a summary of safety issues related to using hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19 patients.
 On Aug. 12, the day after presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden named Harris as his running mate, Paul Sperry, the former Washington bureau chief for Investor’s Business Daily, tweeted what looked like a bombshell. 
 "DEVELOPING," it said. "Kamala’s sister takes hydroxychloroquine."
 We reached out to Sperry about the tweet but did not immediately hear back. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steve Kirsch
 
 
 stated on November 9, 2021 in an article
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Gavin Newsom is out of sight likely because he has Guillain-Barre syndrome from his booster shot.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Monique Curet • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fact is, this story has already, well, developed. Maya Harris, Kamala Harris’ sister, broke the news exactly four months earlier. 
 "I have lupus," Maya Harris tweeted on April 12, sharing an article she had written for the Atlantic. "I haven’t spoken publicly about it before now. But then coronavirus hit, killing black people at alarming rates & Trump unnecessarily put lupus patients—disproportionately black women—at higher risk."
 In the story, Maya Harris writes: "Not long ago, Donald Trump started talking and tweeting about hydroxychloroquine, which I have taken for most of my adult life, as if it were a miracle drug—a ‘game changer’ for treating COVID-19, the president insists. Immediately, thousands of people began hoarding it, causing shortages that have resulted in lupus patients—and their doctors—struggling to get the supply they need."
 Sperry’s tweet is technically accurate: Maya Harris does take the drug. But, as many people pointed out in their replies to the tweet, it’s wrongly cast as if this is breaking news. Other comments make clear that at least some people are reading an unsaid suggestion: that she takes it to treat or prevent COVID-19. 
 She uses the drug for lupus. 
 We rate this tweet Half True.
California health officials have warned that beaches pose a health threat during the pandemic because they draw large crowds of people who cluster together, according to the Los Angeles Times. 
 In March, Los Angeles County closed all of its beaches to try to slow the spread of coronavirus. But an image being shared on social media suggests authorities are taking this directive to an extreme. 
 "A California surfer was arrested for violating the state’s stay-at-home order," reads the text over an image of what looks like two sheriff deputies walking a man in handcuffs down a beach. "He was alone, in the ocean, when police violated social distancing protocols to arrest him, and potentially expose him to infection. This isn’t about safety, it’s about control!"
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 The photo is authentic. On April 2, Los Angeles County sheriff’s deputies arrested a paddle boarder — not a surfer — on grounds he ignored lifeguards’ orders to get out of the ocean near Malibu Pier for at least 30 minutes, the Times reports. Lifeguards contacted the deputies who responded by boat, according to the sheriff’s department.
 In video taken by bystanders and posted to Instagram it appears that the man was paddle boarding alone.
 "The man, who was not identified by authorities, eventually made his way to the beach, where he was arrested on suspicion of disobeying a lifeguard and violating Gov. Gavin Newsom’s stay-at-home order, a misdemeanor," the story says.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steve Kirsch
 
 
 stated on November 9, 2021 in an article
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Gavin Newsom is out of sight likely because he has Guillain-Barre syndrome from his booster shot.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Monique Curet • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department confirmed to PolitiFact that the man was arrested for violating a lifeguard’s orders. 
 But Newsom’s order says that it "shall be enforceable pursuant to California law, including, but not limited to, Government Code section 8665." That law says that anyone who "refuses or willfully neglects to obey any lawful order or regulation promulgated or issued as provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment."
 The paddle boarder was booked at a sheriff’s station and released on a promise to appear in court, according to the Times. 
 On its website, the California Department of Public Health advises that public health officials recommend social distancing — including maintaining approximately six feet away from other people — to slow the spread of infectious diseases like COVID-19. 
 Our ruling
 The Facebook post says a lone surfer in California was arrested for flouting the state’s stay-at-home order. That’s mostly right — it was a paddle boarder, not a surfer, out on the water at a beach that was closed to slow the spread of COVID-19. Authorities say he was arrested for disobeying a lifeguard and violating the state’s restrictions.
 We rate this Facebook post Mostly True.
Leaders across the country are largely unanimous in calling for compliance with dramatic social changes to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
 U.S. Sen Ron Johnson, a Wisconsin Republican elected after a long career in the business world, struck a slightly different chord in a guest column in USA TODAY.
 The piece drew plenty of attention online and across social media, including an article published March 31, 2020, that has been shared widely on Facebook.
 That article summarized Johnson’s column with this headline: "Ron Johnson: Americans Should Go Back To Work, Because ‘Death Is An Unavoidable Part Of Life.’"
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Let’s see how that summary lines up with Johnson’s piece.
 What the column said
 The headline implies Johnson is calling for a widespread — or even comprehensive — return to work.
 The Johnson piece in USA Today, published March 29, 2020, makes clear at the start he is not calling for any such immediate return to normalcy. Here is how it reads:
 I’m not aware of any public official, including President Donald Trump, who is calling for a complete opening of the U.S. economy.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What more people are saying is that as we learn more about COVID-19, we should evaluate the total societal cost of this awful disease and try to put things into perspective. …
 Imagine the potential psychological and human toll if this shutdown continues indefinitely, unemployment reaches 20% or higher, as some now predict, and we sink into a deep recession or depression.
 Johnson says social distancing "should continue until this outbreak is under control."
 But he did also reference death being unavoidable. Here’s the full context for that line:
 Every premature death is a tragedy, but death is an unavoidable part of life. More than 2.8 million die each year — nearly 7,700 a day. The 2017-18 flu season was exceptionally bad, with 61,000 deaths attributed to it. Can you imagine the panic if those mortality statistics were attributed to a new virus and reported nonstop?
 Johnson goes on to call for reversing the current labeling of "essential businesses," saying we should instead determine nonessential business "that pose a risk for coronavirus spread." He said those could be shut down and financial support provided to the employees and businesses until they can re-open.
 The brief story linked in the Facebook post describes Johnson’s position more accurately than the headline, though it also opens by labeling him "the living embodiment of clueless privilege."
 Our ruling
 A viral Facebook post said Johnson is saying "Americans should go back to work, because 'death is an unavoidable part of life.'"
 Johnson did use the line about death being unavoidable, but the headline exaggerates his position, implying he thinks all or most people should go back to work. He explicitly says he supports social distancing and keeping some businesses closed at this point.
 We rate this Half True.
Democratic congressional candidate Nate McMurray recently took to Twitter to attack state Sen. Chris Jacobs, his Republican opponent, over a vote he cast on paid sick leave. 
 McMurray and Jacobs are the two major-party candidates running for the vacant 27th District congressional seat. The vacancy emerged when Republican Rep. Chris Collins resigned following pleading guilty to federal charges in an insider trading case. Collins was sentenced to 26 months in prison.
 On April 8, McMurray tweeted, "Forbes called my opponents billionaire uncle, ‘The face of corporate greed during the corona.’ My opponent has only about $70M. But true to form, he voted against paid leave for Covid19. Support @Nate_McMurray for Congress. Leadership Matters!"
 Forbes called my opponents billionaire uncle, “The face of corporate greed during the corona.”
 
 My opponent has only about $70M. But true to form, he voted against paid leave for Covid19.
 
 Support @Nate_McMurray
  for Congress. Leadership Matters! https://t.co/u6pS9uEq36 pic.twitter.com/gFgRIu7b0x— Nate McMurray for Congress 2020 (@Nate_McMurray) April 8, 2020 
 
 McMurray’s campaign confirmed that the tweet referred to a state Senate bill, S8091, which passed the Senate on March 18 and was signed into law by Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo. It provides for certain employee benefits if the employee is subject to a mandatory or precautionary order of quarantine or isolation due to COVID-19.
 Among these benefits is paid sick leave during the government-mandated shutdown of non-essential businesses.
 Jacobs voted against the bill. He was one of six senators who voted against it. All of the senators voting against the bill were Republicans serving in the Democratic-controlled chamber.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jacobs issued a press release the day before the vote critical of the measure.
 In the release, Jacobs called the bill a "new burden on New York businesses that will significantly raise costs starting in 2021. These new requirements would mandate small businesses grant paid leave for employees for an extremely broad swath of activities not at all related to being sick, such as ‘immigration’ and to ‘prepare for or participate in any criminal or civil proceeding.’ The COVID-19 crisis will bring many small businesses to their knees."
 In a May 1 statement to PolitiFact, Jacobs said that he supports paid sick leave for workers coping with COVID-19 but voted against the bill because he thought it should have been presented differently. 
 "S8091 was a poorly written bill because it imposed 100% of the cost onto small businesses, which are already fighting for their very survival during this coronavirus crisis," Jacobs said. " I could not, in good conscience, vote for a bill which would put more financial stress on our already struggling small businesses."
 Jacobs said that if the bill worsens the environment for small businesses, more of them would close, and in the long run, employees of those businesses would suffer. 
 Our ruling
 McMurray said Jacobs "voted against paid leave for COVID-19."
 Jacobs did vote against the New York Senate bill that provides paid sick leave to employees of non-essential businesses. Jacobs argued that while he supports the concept of sick leave for workers with COVID-19, he thought the particular bill offered placed too much of a burden on small businesses.
 The statement is accurate but needs additional information, so we rate it Mostly True.
The coronavirus has hit the African American and Hispanic community particularly hard. In New York City, for example, the death rate for African Americans is double the white death rate.
 In an interview on CNN, Desiree Rogers, CEO of the cosmetic firm Black Opal Beauty and former social secretary in the Obama administration, said the jobs black people do put them more at risk.
 "We know that only 20% of African Americans had jobs where they could work from home," Rogers told CNN June 10. "What does that tell you? They don't have the capacity to be able to work from home. They have service jobs, and so that means they have to be out."
 Social distancing under COVID-19 thrust millions of workers into telework. Rogers’ stat that only one in five African Americans were able to exercise that option is accurate.
 The American Time Use Survey has been asking households how they spend their time since 2003. Broadly, people report what they have done in a 24-hour period.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 According to the latest survey data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 19.7% of African Americans could work at home. The fraction was even lower for Hispanics — about 16%. The option to work at home was available to 30% of whites and 37% of Asians. The figure for all workers is 28.8%.
 
 Economists at the Bureau of Labor Statistics said their survey doesn’t show why the numbers play out the way they do, but they pointed to government data on race and ethnicity and type of job.
 Black Americans represent a bit over 12% of all workers, but are 26% of workers in health care support occupations, a field that includes hospitals and nursing homes. Those are places of high risk for exposure to the coronavirus. 
 There are other reasons why the virus has a disproportionate impact on African Americans, including underlying health conditions and less access to health care. 
 Our ruling
 Rogers said that only 20% of African Americans have jobs where they could work from home. That’s pretty much exactly what government data show.
 We rate this claim True.
North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper eased pandemic restrictions on retail stores before doing so for churches -- a move that prompted pushback from some members of the faith community.
 Non-essential stores and indoor church services were both initially forbidden to operate under Cooper’s stay-at-home order. When Cooper launched Phase One of reopening North Carolina, he allowed some stores to open but didn’t allow churches to hold services indoors.
 Experts generally agree that traditional church customs such as singing, passing around bulletins and even sharing food would make worship services especially dangerous during the coronavirus outbreak. But Cooper’s critics argued for a chance to worship while being responsible.
 During a press conference on May 12, Cooper said his decision was based on science.
 "We know that inside it is much more likely that you’re going to transmit this virus, particularly when you’re sitting or standing in one place for a long period of time, and this is across the board. And some people are trying to compare this with retail. With retail, people are moving around and you don’t have as much a chance to spread the virus (as you do) when people are sitting or standing indoors."
 Since then, a judge’s ruling has enabled indoor church services in North Carolina. A US District Court Judge allowed for a restraining order on Cooper’s rules, and Cooper said he won’t appeal.
 Still, we wondered which is more dangerous:
 
 
 sitting in a building with the same group of people for a prolonged period, or
 
 
 walking around a building with an ever-changing group of people?
 
 
 The answer isn’t simple. Is it possible that a church could practice social distancing well enough to prevent virus spread? Yes. Is it also possible that one shopper could linger too long around another shopper who’s infected? Also yes. 
 Because of those variables, the country’s top health organizations told us they haven’t compared the two environments enough to say whether one is more dangerous than another. 
 However, experts do believe that sitting in one place for a long time does pose a threat -- while shopping usually allows people the physical freedom to avoid someone who might be infected.
 Specific comparisons
 For this fact check, we reached out to the World Health Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which is directed by Dr. Anthony Fauci.
 None of the groups offered specifics on which scenario is more dangerous.
 The WHO doesn’t categorize activities by risk because each scenario "depends on a range of factors, from the local transmission scenario that is occurring, to prevention measures adopted by individuals to the IPC procedures in place in these public spaces," said Ashley Baldwin, a regional spokeswoman.
 Fauci’s group responded similarly: "I’m not aware that this is anything our researchers have explored," NIAID spokesman Ken Pekoc said.
 The CDC hasn’t compared them either, CDC spokeswoman Kate Grusich said. "CDC has not compared locations or settings for COVID-19 transmission, so we can’t comment on these questions at this time," she said.
 But the CDC does emphasize the risk of time spent around other people in close proximity. 
 Kelly Haight Connor, communications manager for North Carolina’s health department, responded to PolitiFact questions on Cooper’s behalf. She pointed out several instances where the CDC warns against large gatherings of people. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The CDC’s webpage on social distancing says "COVID-19 spreads mainly among people who are in close contact (within about 6 feet) for a prolonged period." The CDC, which acknowledges the "risk of gatherings," also offers guidance for churches hoping to hold services during the pandemic. Recommendations include:
 
 
 scheduling multiple services, with enough time between each to allow for cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces,
 
 
 promoting social distancing,
 
 
 limiting the sharing of materials,
 
 
 considering holding services and gatherings in a large, well-ventilated area or outdoors.
 
 
 What experts say
 The novel coronavirus travels through respiratory droplets expelled when someone coughs, sneezes or talks. Without definitive studies comparing the likelihood of spread in two environments, we turned to experts for their opinion. 
 Karen Hoffmann, the immediate past president of the Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, told PolitiFact that the ability to walk away from someone is key.
 And if you do pass someone in an aisle at Target, experts believe you’re less at risk than someone sitting still in a confined space. "I would not worry about walking by someone," Dr. Amesh Adalja, an infectious disease specialist at Johns Hopkins University, told Slate. 
 "Even in a health care setting, contact is defined by being near someone for a certain amount of time," Adalja said. "I would not worry about these fleeting encounters. The virus isn’t airborne—droplets need to get from one person to another."
 Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at Columbia University, told us she generally agrees.
 "Reports from indoor spaces (restaurants, offices) suggest that both physical proximity and duration of exposure are important for transmission," Rasmussen said in an email. "So sitting still around others in close physical proximity is probably higher risk than incidentally passing by someone in a store, but the risks aren’t quantified because there are a lot of variables that can impact this."
 A recent NPR article categorized 14 different activities by their level of risk for infection. Worship services? "High risk." Going shopping? "Risk varies."
 "Crowds with high density lead to substantial increase in risk," said Dr. William Miller, an epidemiologist at Ohio State University. "The major mitigating factor is that people don't mingle in a single place for long."
 Churches as hotspots
 While churches may be able to mitigate coronavirus spread, there are multiple examples of churches failing to take precautions -- and thus becoming the source of small outbreaks.
 A church revival in Hopkins County, Kentucky was linked to at least 30 cases and three deaths, according to The Courier Journal. Officials in California connected 71 cases to one church in a suburb of Sacramento, The Guardian reported.
 The Washington Post recently listed several examples in a story about the dangers of worship during the pandemic.
 On its Facebook page, the CDC on May 19 used a rural Arkansas church as an example of how fast coronavirus can spread in group settings. The CDC reported that two people with coronavirus symptoms attended the church in early March. 
 "Of the 92 church members who attended the gatherings, 35 were later confirmed to have COVID-19, which led to three deaths. Through contact tracing, an additional 26 confirmed cases were identified in the community," the CDC’s Facebook post says. "This outbreak highlights the potential for widespread transmission of COVID-19 during in-person, faith-based events."
 The CDC posted a report on the Arkansas outbreak on its website.
 Our ruling
 Cooper said shopping isn’t as likely to spread coronavirus as church services because "people are moving around and you don’t have as much a chance to spread the virus (as you do) when people are sitting or standing indoors."
 The world’s leading health organizations have not offered a risk comparison between shopping and attending a worship service in part because there are so many variables. 
 However, generally speaking, experts are definitely less worried about spaces where people can move freely than they are about spaces where people sit near each other for long periods of time. We rate this claim Mostly True.
Coronavirus infections are on the rise in Texas, with some areas experiencing a more dramatic increase than others.
 In Central Texas, Austin and its surrounding counties have reported an increase in the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 and hospitalizations. Hays County, which sits to the south of Austin, has been hit particularly hard.
 On June 19, the county reported more active cases than Austin’s Travis County — a remarkable feat considering that Travis County’s population is five times that of Hays County.
 U.S. Rep. Lloyd Doggett, a Democrat whose district includes parts of both counties, shared two tweets about the Austin area, including one highlighting the impact of the virus in Hays County.
 "Hays County is one of the only places in Texas with more trouble: an incredible 845% increase in cases since June 7," he wrote.
 There’s no question Hays County has experienced a dramatic increase in the number of COVID-19 cases, but is Doggett’s figure accurate? 
 Hays County increase tied to activities
 In response to a question from PolitiFact Texas, Hays County spokeswoman Kim Hilsenbeck shared a press release outlining the impact of the coronavirus in the county since the onset of the pandemic.
 During April and early May — when local and statewide orders to stay at home were in place — the number of new daily cases in the county ranged from zero to ten.
 In late April, Gov. Greg Abbott initiated the first phase of a plan to reopen the state’s economy and allowed the statewide stay-at-home order to expire. He also allowed restaurants, retail stores, malls and movie theaters to reopen at limited capacity.
 In subsequent phases, Abbott allowed barbershops and salons to reopen with limited capacity and other restrictions. He also allowed rivers, parks and other natural areas to reopen. 
 County health officials said they believe the gradual reopening of businesses might have contributed to an increase in COVID-19 cases. 
 "Through contact tracing, our health department staff were able to see the rapid increase in COVID-19 totals seemed to coincide with activities such as working at or going to restaurants and bars, activities such as floating the river, and attending large public gatherings," the release reads. 
 Hilsenbeck also highlighted Mothers Day (May 10), Memorial Day (May 25) and protests against racism and police brutality as significant events in May.
 By the end of May and early June, the number of new cases in the county started to rise. On May 27 there were 18 new cases. On June 8, there were 43 new cases. 
 More recently, the number of new daily cases in Hays County has ranged from 100 to 200. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In April and May, the majority of new cases in the county were primarily in Kyle among people older than 30 who were Hispanic. 
 But since early June, the group experiencing the largest increase in new COVID-19 cases is 20 to 29-year-olds in San Marcos. The number of people who identified as Hispanic has decreased.
 "While not all 20-29-year-olds are college students, San Marcos has a large student population because of Texas State University, many of whom are now back in town following a period of virtual learning throughout the spring," the release reads.
 Examining data on new cases
 Doggett spokeswoman Kate Stotesbery said the figure he shared came from a graph published by an Austin-area television station. 
 The graph shows the number of new coronavirus cases that have been reported each day in Hays County since April, plus a line showing the 14-day average of daily new cases.
 An arrow pointing upwards is overlaid on the graphic, with text on top that reads: "845% 14-day average since June 7."
 But Doggett’s remark on Twitter is missing that detail — that there has been an 845% increase in the 14-day average of new COVID-19 cases in the county since June 7. The increase in the actual number of cases is much higher.
 On June 7, the cumulative number of cases in the county was 385 and the number of new daily cases had been fluctuating. There were 24 new cases on June 2, 14 new cases on June 4 and zero new cases on June 7.
 By June 21, the cumulative count of cases in Hays County was 1,608, with 57 new cases reported that day.
 Looking at the 14-day average of new cases, it was 8 on June 7 and 87 on June 21.
 But the 7-day average is a more commonly used measurement by government agencies and news outlets to assess changes in the number of new cases in the area. The change in that figure during this period is substantially higher.
 Using weekly averages instead of daily tallies offers a more accurate picture of change over time, as it reduces the impact of daily spikes.
 From June 7 to June 21, Hays County experienced a roughly 1,569% increase in the 7-day average of new COVID-19 cases — from 8 cases on June 7 to 134 on June 21.
 Our ruling
 Doggett said that Hays County had experienced "an incredible 845% increase in cases since June 7."
 Doggett was actually speaking about an increase in the 14-day average of new COVID-19 cases — a less common measurement of the increase in COVID-19 cases in an area — but his figure is accurate. 
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
House Democrats are advocating legislation that would send Americans a new round of checks to help with financial problems caused by the coronavirus pandemic. A Facebook post says that under their proposal, immigrants in the country illegally also stand to benefit, getting billions of dollars.
 "Pelosi’s new coronavirus bill allows illegals to receive billions in relief funds in past, current, and future payments," said text over a photo of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi holding a gavel, with a crowd of people, purportedly immigrants, in the background.
 The caption on the May 12 Facebook post said the payments "would not just be a one-time check, they would give them past, current any future payments of YOUR money as 33 million Americans are unemployed."
 The post is from We Build The Wall, Inc., a group that's raising money to build sections of barriers along the U.S.-Mexico border.
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Pelosi does support a bill that would allow immigrants who are in the country illegally and who pay taxes to get coronavirus emergency aid from the federal government. But the Facebook post needs clarification and additional information.
 HEROES Act expands eligibility for stimulus checks
 The Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions Act, or the HEROES Act, was introduced May 12 and passed the House May 15, 208-199, with only one Republican vote. 
 Among the key provisions of the roughly $3 trillion bill, it gives nearly $1 trillion to state and local governments, creates a $200 billion hazard-pay fund for essential workers, and provides $75 billion to support coronavirus testing, contact tracing and patient isolation.
 The bill also offers a new round of direct payments to families — $1,200 per person and up to $6,000 per household. The payments would go out to people who filed tax returns for 2018 or 2019 (and to some who didn’t), with the total amount based on income. For instance, a single person who earned less than $75,000 would get $1,200; those who earned $75,000 or more would receive less. 
 The proposal seeks to augment the financial assistance that started mid-April when one-time checks were sent under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act.
 Under the CARES Act, however, U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents were ineligible for a check if they filed a joint tax return with a spouse who used an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, or ITIN.
 ITINs are issued by the IRS to people who don’t have a Social Security number, including immigrants in the country illegally, so they can use it to pay federal income taxes. (Some international students and researchers and their spouses also use ITINs.) 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The IRS in 2014 said ITIN filers pay over $9 billion in annual payroll taxes.
 RELATED: Claim about stimulus check eligibility for Americans married to immigrants missing context
 Pelosi and other House Democrats have said that "mixed-status" families should not have been left out of the CARES Act. So the proposed HEROES Act includes them in its aid package, and retroactively makes ITIN filers eligible for the CARES Act payment as well.
 The left-leaning Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, using IRS data, estimated that this provision would benefit more than 4.3 million adults and 3.5 million children in households of ITIN filers or of mixed immigration status, paying them a total $16.4 billion ($7 billion under the CARES Act and $9.4 billion under the HEROES Act).
 The beneficiary figures include ITIN filers as well as their spouses and children who are U.S. citizens or lawful permanent residents. Meg Wiehe, deputy executive director of the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, said it was difficult to discern from the IRS data exactly how many prospective beneficiaries are immigrants in the U.S. illegally.
 Julia Gelatt, senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute, said a lot of U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents can get support through unemployment insurance, stimulus payments, food stamps and other public benefits.
 ITINs are used for federal tax reporting, but they do not provide legal immigration status, and immigrants in the country illegally are generally ineligible for federal public benefits, such as food stamps.
 The goal of the HEROES Act, as it relates to unauthorized immigrants and their family members, is to help people who are struggling financially and who have no access to other financial support, Gelatt said.
 The HEROES Act financial assistance isn’t exclusive to ITIN filers; U.S. citizens and green-card holders who file taxes using a Social Security number would also benefit, with the same aid amounts and income thresholds. The payments to all eligible people are estimated to cost more than $400 billion.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said, "Pelosi’s new coronavirus bill allows illegals to receive billions in relief funds in past, current, and future payments."
 The HEROES Act, a proposal backed by Pelosi, would allow immigrants who are in the country illegally and who pay taxes to receive federal relief funds during the coronavirus pandemic.
 Immigrants who pay taxes using an ITIN would be eligible for an aid payment under the HEROES Act, and retroactively under the CARES Act, which corresponds to the "current" and "past" payments cited in the post. It’s unclear what is meant by "future" payment. We contacted We Build the Wall for comment, but did not hear back.
 A tax policy group estimated that if the HEROES Act became law as written, about $16.4 billion would go to households of ITIN filers or of mixed status. Beneficiaries would include U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents who live in a household with an ITIN filer.
 The post is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate it Mostly True.
As New York state began implementing a regional approach to reopening after coronavirus-related shutdowns, a lawmaker from western New York complained that many of his constituents faced a longer wait to reopen because they were geographically linked to more hard-hit counties. 
 State Sen. George Borrello, who made the comments in a statement on May 11, represents New York’s 57th district, which includes three less-populated counties — Allegany, Cattaraugus and Chautauqua — south of more heavily populated regions near Buffalo (Erie County) and Niagara Falls (Niagara County).
 "While infection rates in Allegany, Cattaraugus and Chautauqua counties have consistently been among the lowest in the state throughout the COVID-19 crisis, our linkage with Erie County and its higher infection rates means that we don’t meet the metrics for reopening, and our hurting, rural economies must remain shut down for at least another two weeks," Borrello said in the statement.
 The state’s reopening plan allowed regions to begin Phase 1 of the reopening process on May 15 as long as they met seven metrics established by the state. The Western New York Region subsequently met all seven metrics on May 18 and entered Phase 1 the following day.
 But we wondered whether Borrello was correct in his May 11 statement that the infection rates in the three rural counties was substantially lower than those of the more urbanized counties to the north, and consistently among the state's lowest.
 We used the county-by-county infection tallies posted on Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s pressroom page and converted them to a rate per 10,000 residents. We ranked the counties from the highest to the lowest for each week from March 30 to mid-May, when Borrello made his statement.
 We found that, as Borrello had said, Allegany, Cattaraugus and Chautauqua counties ranked low in infection rates consistently over that period, while Erie and Niagara started higher and continued to rise:
 
 Our analysis found that Chautauqua never ranked higher than sixth from the bottom for infection rates among the 58 New York counties for which data was available, and Chautauqua had the lowest rate of any county for much of the period.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allegany and Cattaraugus ranked marginally higher than Chautauqua, but well below Erie and Niagara. 
 Overall, the three small counties usually ranked in the bottom one-third of counties in the state, and by the time Borrello made his statement, they were all in the bottom one-fifth of counties. By contrast, Erie and Niagara were consistently in the top half of counties as measured by infections per capita.
 New York City (including all five boroughs) ranked at or near the top for the entire period.
 The state reopening plan mirrored what many other states are doing, with certain types of non-essential businesses opening in phases in each of 10 regions, as long as certain health measurements are met in the region.
 Borrello said in an interview that he just wants sensible reopening policies that are implemented "fairly and equitably."
 "Even though the infection rates are higher in Erie County than the rest of the region, we’re still talking about keeping those same precautions and ensuring that they’re being adhered to," he said.
 Our ruling
 Borrello said that "infection rates in Allegany, Cattaraugus and Chautauqua counties have consistently been among the lowest in the state."
 A look at the data from the end of March to mid-May confirms that the infection rate in each of the three counties was usually in the bottom one-third of counties in the state, and by the time Borello made his statement, they were all in the bottom one-fifth of counties. By contrast, Erie and Niagara were consistently in the top half of counties as measured by infections per capita.
 We rate the statement True.
A vaccine to prevent coronavirus infections is tantalizingly close, with the first inoculations in the United States weeks or even days away. But concern persists that not enough Americans will be willing to be vaccinated to fully halt the virus’ spread.
 President-elect Joe Biden raised this concern during a Dec. 3 interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper.
 When Tapper asked whether Biden planned to be vaccinated before he’s inaugurated on Jan. 20, Biden said he would.
 "People have lost faith in the ability of the vaccine to work," Biden said. "Already, the numbers are really staggeringly low. And it matters what a president and a vice president do. … And it's important to communicate to the American people it's safe to do this."
 We interviewed seven experts for this story. They expressed disappointment with Americans’ relatively low willingness to take the vaccine so far, and they were especially concerned about deeper skepticism of a vaccine among racial minorities. But they added that these early findings do not mean that the effort is doomed.
 Most of the polling so far has asked about a vaccine that was still theoretical. Now, several vaccines have been presented to regulators with strong initial results, and if the initial rollouts are smooth — and if targeted educational efforts begin to have an effect — the experts expect Americans to become more comfortable with taking a vaccine. (The Biden campaign did not respond to an inquiry for this article.)
 What the polling shows
 Since May, at least seven pollsters have taken a look at Americans’ willingness to receive a coronavirus vaccine. 
 Most polls have found between 50% and 70% of respondents willing to get vaccinated. (Some of the differences may stem from differences in how the question was worded in each poll.)
 
 
 Respondents’ stated willingness to receive the vaccine fell in the summer and the early fall before recovering somewhat in October and November.
 Observers said this might have to do with early, positive results for several vaccine trials — making a vaccine less theoretical to Americans — or relief among Democratic survey respondents that Joe Biden will be president during most of the vaccine rollout, rather than Donald Trump.
 To understand the public’s wariness about a coronavirus vaccine, it helps to take into account "the politicization of the virus and seemingly everything surrounding it, as well as the level of misinformation being circulated," said Jason Salemi, an associate professor of public health at the University of South Florida.
 Why the current level of willingness to be vaccinated is worrisome
 While less-than-optimal levels of vaccination will still help ease the pandemic, epidemiologists say that something approaching full eradication can occur only if most people receive their shots.
 "Given what we know about the virus so far, we are going to need higher proportions of people to take the vaccine then who are now saying they will for protection to occur on a population level," said Nicole Gatto, an associate professor in Claremont Graduate University’s school of community and global health.
 An especially important issue is that some subgroups of the population are less welcoming of a coronavirus vaccine than the public at large.
 While 33% of white respondents to a Kaiser Family Foundation poll said they would probably not or definitely not take the vaccine, the rates were higher for Hispanics (37%) and Blacks (49%).
 A survey by the COVID Collaborative found that 14% of Black respondents and 34% of Hispanic respondents said they mostly or completely trust that a vaccine will be safe. Only 18% of Black respondents and 40% of Hispanic respondents said they mostly or completely trust that a vaccine will be effective.
 Most analysts attribute the hesitancy about vaccines in the Black community to a legacy of unethical medical experimentation, as well as longstanding disparities in the quality of health care available to racial minorities.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "There are historical reasons that justify that caution and skepticism," said William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine, health policy and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University. 
 If Black Americans do end up forgoing vaccination at especially high rates, it could be especially problematic, since rates of illness and death from COVID-19 have been higher for Blacks than for whites. One reason for this may be their added risk of exposure.
 "Minority groups are overrepresented among essential workers, and these are groups that are among the most important for the vaccine to reach," Gatto said.
 The eventual response could be better than the polls say now
 Before assuming widespread vaccine skepticism will lead to poor vaccination rates, it’s worth noting some context.
 Flu vaccination coverage among adults in the United States has fluctuated between 37% and 48% in the past decade, Salemi said. Compared against the widely available vaccine for the flu, the survey data for a coronavirus vaccine is "not ‘staggering,’" Salemi said. 
 In addition, there’s evidence that older Americans — those who are more susceptible to the virus’ worst impacts — are more willing to get vaccinated. For instance, a CNN poll in October found that 60% of those age 65 and older said they would try to get a vaccine, compared with 49% among those younger than 45. 
 And history suggests that concerted public education campaigns can help boost low public confidence.
 "Successful mass-vaccination campaigns have been carried out previously in the United States, including for polio in the 1950s and more recently for the 2009 H1N1 pandemic," said Matthew B. Laurens, associate professor of pediatrics at the University of Maryland School of Medicine’s Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health. "Maintenance of public trust will depend on clear messages to the public regarding vaccine benefits and side effects, transparency of vaccine developers and researchers regarding what is known and is not known about available vaccines for COVID-19, and continuous engagement and dialogue with communities and individuals."
 Campaigns can work well by leveraging community members, faith leaders, celebrities and athletes — "people who can demonstrate by example," Gatto said.
 Ultimately, though, one of the biggest factors driving lower-than-desired public approval of a coronavirus vaccine is simply an understandable caution about trying something new.
 "A dose of healthy skepticism is normal," Schaffner said. "These are new vaccines with new technologies against a new virus." 
 Experts agree that the public’s view of vaccines can change, since Americans are being bombarded every day by new information about the virus and possible vaccines.
 "We have to be realistic about the ebb and flow as more information comes out about the particular vaccines — how the initial vaccination efforts go, and what happens to the first folks taking it," said Mollyann Brodie, executive vice president for public opinion and survey research at the Kaiser Family Foundation.
 "Even today, we don't yet have a vaccine that has been given the green light by the FDA, and most of these surveys were taken before data from Moderna and Pfizer were released," added Tara Smith, a Kent State University epidemiologist. 
 Experts express cautious optimism that a smooth rollout will ease concerns among Americans who are currently reluctant. "I do think the comfort level with the vaccine will indeed increase over time," said Brooke Nichols, an infectious disease mathematical modeler at the Boston University School of Public Health.
 Also important to remember "is that we have some time," Schaffner said. "We can’t vaccinate everybody in a week and a half."
 Our ruling
 Biden said, "People have lost faith in the ability of the vaccine to work. Already, the numbers are really staggeringly low."
 Experts agree that the initial percentages of Americans saying they’re willing to take the vaccine are lower than would be ideal to fully eradicate the coronavirus, and that the numbers are especially low among racial and ethnic minorities even though those groups have been hit disproportionately by the pandemic.
 However, experts aren’t despairing yet, because they see public opinion as fluid and likely to be shaped by new information, including regulatory approvals and the rollout of the actual vaccines. History has also shown that concerted educational efforts can help increase comfort with new vaccines.
 We rate the statement Half True.
You can’t say Bill Gates didn’t tell you so, according to a recent Facebook post. 
 
 
 "Bill Gates told us about the coronavirus in 2015," claims the March 15 video published on the social media platform.
 The video begins with the Microsoft co-founder standing on stage underneath a giant projector screen. "The greatest risk of global catastrophe doesn’t look like this," Gates says as behind him appears a giant image of a bomb exploding. 
 "Instead," Gates continues, "it looks like this." The picture overhead changes to what appears to be a giant microbe, an image similar to the graphics that news organizations and others use to illustrate their stories about the new coronavirus .
 "If anything kills a million people over the next few decades, it’s most likely to be a highly infectious virus rather than a war," Gates says. "Not missiles, but microbes." 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Gates did say these words on a stage. And the images that appear in the video on Facebook did show on a screen behind him as he spoke. But this post goes too far by suggesting Gates specifically predicted COVID-19.
 No mention of coronavirus in Gates’ original 2015 speech 
 On March 19, Gates published a blog post addressing questions about COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus that was first reported in Wuhan, China, on Dec. 31, 2019. The post is an edited transcript of an Ask Me Anything session he did on Reddit on March 18. In it, he refers to a TED talk he did in 2015. Footage from this talk is what appears in the Facebook video. 
 The Facebook video is only a clip of Gates’ comments. The actual talk begins with him discussing how when he was a kid, the disaster Americans feared most was a nuclear war. But his line that opens the Facebook video comes soon after. He goes on to say that "we’ve actually invested very little in a system to stop an epidemic. We’re not ready for the next epidemic." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He doesn’t use the word "coronavirus" in his speech. He does discuss Ebola and the failures in combating the disease’s outbreak in West Africa in 2014 — the largest Ebola outbreak since the virus was discovered in 1976, according to the World Health Organization.
 In aftermath of Ebola, Gates did warn of another epidemic 
 About 10,000 people died during the Ebola outbreak and nearly all deaths were in West Africa, Gates said in his TED talk. The disease didn’t spread more, in part, because it didn’t spread through the air, and by the time patients are contagious, they’re generally so sick they’re bedridden. 
 "The failure to prepare could allow the next epidemic to be dramatically more devastating than Ebola," Gates said. "Next time we might not be so lucky. You can have a virus where people feel well enough while they’re infectious that they get on a plane or they go to a market. The source of the virus could be a natural epidemic like Ebola, or it could be bioterrorism. So there are things that would literally make things a thousand times worse."
 Gates cited the 1918 Spanish flu as an example of a virus that spreads through the air. 
 "So here’s what would happen," he says. "It would spread throughout the world very, very quickly. And you can see over 30 million people died from that epidemic. So this is a serious problem. We should be concerned."
 He then discusses how we could build a good response system — how we could be prepared for the next epidemic. 
 "There’s no need to panic," he says. "We don’t have to hoard cans of spaghetti or go down to the basement. But we need to get going, because time is not on our side. In fact, if there’s one positive thing that can come out of the Ebola epidemic, it’s that it can serve as an early warning, a wake-up call, to get ready. If we start now, we can be ready for the next epidemic."
 Our ruling
 The Facebook post says that Gates told Americans about the coronavirus in 2015. But in the 2015 TED talk featured in the video, he never actually uses the word coronavirus, nor does he mention COVID-19. 
 His comments do sound prescient, though. He talks about an epidemic and we’re now in the midst of a pandemic. People could be infected with COVID-19 and not show symptoms for days, if at all. And it’s mainly spread between people in close contact through respiratory droplets when someone coughs or sneezes.
 We rate this Facebook post Mostly True.
Like many states, North Carolina is tracking a record number of COVID-19 cases this holiday season.
 And in an attempt to explain the severity of the illness, the state’s top health official compared coronavirus deaths to data on the flu.
 "Sadly more than 5,000 North Carolinians have lost their lives from this virus since our first death on March 12 of this year," Health Secretary Mandy Cohen said during a Dec. 1 press conference.
 "To give some perspective, just under 1,500 people died from the flu in the past 10 years," Cohen said. "In just 11 months, Covid has killed more than three times that number."
 Is it true that the coronavirus has killed more North Carolinians in a year than the flu has in 10 years?
 According to the state’s data, yes.
 NC Covid-19 deaths
 North Carolina’s Department of Health and Human Services tracks both COVID-19 and influenza deaths.
 As of Wednesday morning, the state had counted 5,284 COVID-19 deaths. DHHS says those deaths include people who have had a positive molecular or antigen test for COVID-19, who died without fully recovering from COVID-19, and who had no alternative cause of death identified. 
 The deaths are reported by hospitals and clinicians directly to the local and state health departments.
 The first reported COVID-19 death did, indeed, occur on March 12. 
 NC flu deaths
 The state’s health department also tracks flu deaths and reports each flu season’s data on its website. Flu deaths are reported by health providers and were confirmed as influenza by an appropriate laboratory or rapid diagnostic test.
 PolitiFact reviewed the last 10 flu seasons, dating back to the 2010-2011 season. In total, we counted 1,486 reported flu deaths. DHHS spokeswoman Kelly Haight confirmed to us by phone that our total is accurate.
 Here’s a list of the flu death counts by season, and a link to the report for each respective season:
 2019-2020: 186
 2018-2019: 203
 2017-2018: 391
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2016-2017: 218
 2015-2016: 59
 2014-2015: 218
 2013-2014: 107
 2012-2013: 59
 2011-2012: 9
 2010-2011: 36
 Other flu counts
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also tracks flu deaths by state. At a glance, it might seem like the CDC and North Carolina reports contradict one other. For instance, the CDC reported North Carolina had 2,064 flu deaths in 2018, while the state’s health department reported far less.
 That’s because the CDC sometimes combines flu and pneumonia deaths together, officials said.
 Under the "flu & pneumonia" section on the CDC’s flu deaths by state website, "most of those deaths are pneumonia deaths," said Jeff Lancashire, acting associate director for communications for the CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics.
 Some pneumonia deaths are caused by the flu, but some can be caused by "many other viruses, bacteria, bacteria-like organisms and fungi," said Kelly Haight, DHHS spokeswoman.
 The year 2018 is the most recent year of flu deaths available on the CDC site. 
 If you start in 2018 and look back 10 years to 1999, Lancashire said "there were 1,806 deaths from exclusively flu alone – without pneumonia (from the public database CDC WONDER – wonder.cdc.gov)." 
 "So if Dr. Cohen was citing deaths from flu alone, she would be correct that COVID19 deaths have exceeded that (number) in NC," he said. 
 The CDC has noted, however, that tallying death counts for COVID-19, flu and pneumonia is complicated and sometimes its data can be incomplete.
 Our ruling
 Cohen said COVID-19 has killed more North Carolinians in a year than the flu has in the last 10 years.
 By the North Carolina health department’s count, there have been 5,200 COVID-19 deaths this year and 1,486 flu deaths over the last decade.
 Cohen’s claim also tracks with data collected by the CDC, according to an agency spokesman. However, the CDC points out that exact numbers can be tricky to count because there are sometimes delays in processing death information.
 We rate her statement True.
As state leaders in Texas look to ease restrictions implemented to slow the spread of coronavirus in the state, some people have raised concerns about the number of tests the state has administered.
 U.S. Rep. Veronica Escobar, D-El Paso, raised the issue during a webcast with the Wilson Center’s Mexico Institute and the Migration Policy Institute on Wednesday.
 "Texas, I believe, either is near the bottom or at the very bottom when it comes to testing per capita, so the numbers are probably far greater than what is being reported," she said. "I believe we don’t have an adequate idea of just how many cases and how many deaths are being reported."
 At the time of Escobar’s remark, Texas had administered 216,783 tests for the coronavirus, with 21,069 positive results, according to the Texas Department of State Health Services. The state was reporting 542 coronavirus fatalities with an estimated 7,341 recoveries.
 Escobar’s spokeswoman Elizabeth Lopez-Sandoval pointed to the COVID Tracking Project as the source of Escobar’s claim comparing Texas testing to other states.
 The COVID Tracking Project was launched by The Atlantic and tracks and publishes data from each state about testing, deaths and hospitalizations related to the coronavirus. 
 Looking at the numbers
 With a population of more than 27.8 million in 2018 and 216,783 tests administered, Texas had administered about 777 coronavirus tests per 100,000 people as of Wednesday, ranking 48th among states in testing per capita.
 Here’s a look at the five states that had administered the fewest coronavirus tests per capita, as of Wednesday:
 
 Kansas: 20,203 tests, or about 695 per 100,000 residents
 Virginia: 60,778 tests, or about 722 per 100,000 residents
 Texas: 216,783 tests, or about 777 per 100,000 residents
 Kentucky: 36,075 tests, or about 812 per 100,000 residents
 Arizona: 56,601 tests, or about 842 per 100,000 residents
 
 The total number of tests administered in Texas is significantly higher than other states at the lower end of the list, but testing per capita remains low.
 Here’s how other states with large populations compare to Texas in the number of tests administered per capita, as of Wednesday:
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Texas: 216,783 tests, or about 777 per 100,000 residents
 California: 465,327 tests, or about 1,189 per 100,000 residents
 Illinois: 164,346 tests, or about 1,281 per 100,000 residents
 Florida: 288,627 tests, or about 1,401 per 100,000 residents
 New York: 669,982 tests, or about 3,415 per 100,000 residents
 
 And here’s how Texas compares to its neighbors in testing per capita, from lowest to highest, as of Wednesday:
 
 Texas: 216,783 tests, or about 777 per 100,000 residents
 Arkansas: 29,713 tests, or about 993 per 100,000 residents
 Oklahoma: 45,913 tests, or about 1,171 per 100,000 residents
 New Mexico: 41,232 tests, or about 1,971 per 100,000 residents
 Louisiana: 142,834 tests, or about 3,063 per 100,000 residents
 
 Efforts to increase testing
 Public health experts say a dramatic increase in testing is needed to ensure it’s safe to reopen sectors of the economy, as limited testing data means there are significant unknowns when it comes to the scope of the virus spread.
 The data that does exist is incomplete, as some private laboratories have not reported the number of negative tests they have administered. And there are clear discrepancies in some county-level data.
 For example, one small West Texas county reported 12 positive cases of the virus but only reported administering one test as of April 13, according to the American-Statesman. 
 During a news conference on April 17, Gov. Greg Abbott said he spoke with the White House and was told Texas would receive "a dramatic increase" in testing — "not just testing those who may show symptoms, but also being able to test entire communities so that we have better information."
 California and Arizona have both expanded which individuals meet the criteria required for testing, allowing individuals with no symptoms to be screened.
 Abbott told reporters that this increase in testing capacity is expected by "late April or early May."
 He declined to offer specifics, but said new testing will be coming from the private sector.
 Texas Department of State Health Services Commissioner John Hellerstedt said the private sector will play a role, but public health authorities also are working to grow their capacity.
 Our Ruling
 Escobar said that Texas "is near the bottom or at the very bottom of COVID-19 testing per capita."
 Data supports Escobar’s statement and shows that Texas has lagged behind other states in terms of coronavirus testing per capita. We rate this claim True.
Republicans’ primary objection to the COVID-19 and economic stimulus bill making its way through Congress is that it spends relatively little on the disease itself.
 In a speech on the Senate floor, Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said the $1.9 trillion package known as the American Rescue Plan was loaded with "pet projects" that had nothing to do with the pandemic or economic recovery.
 "All kinds of liberal wish list items that would do nothing to help American families put COVID behind them," McConnell said Feb. 24. "Just about 1% of the money is for vaccines."
 McConnell’s focus on 1% for vaccines caught our attention.
 His staff said he drew on the words of the Democrats themselves when they unveiled a key section of the sweeping bill.
 The chair of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Rep. Frank Pallone, D-N.J., highlighted a handful of items in the package in a news release, including $14 billion for vaccines, $46 billion for testing, contact tracing, and mitigation, and $25 billion to reduce health disparities across the country.
 The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office and the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget use the $14 billion figure.
 However, there are different ways to add up the numbers.
 The same Democratic-controlled committee that provided the $14 billion figure came out a few days later with a factsheet that uses an amount of $20 billion. And they note there’s an additional $5 billion for advanced vaccine development.
 The different totals depend on what counts as vaccine spending. The lower figure in the first Democratic press release included only work at the CDC, the FDA, and ensuring a reliable supply chain to produce and administer the vaccine.
 The higher Democratic tally included other activities, such as sequencing the genome of virus variants and paying for health care workers to administer the vaccine.
 How much does this matter?
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In percentage terms, not that much. Even a total of $25 billion still amounts to just over 1% of the bill’s estimated price tag. That’s because the overall package includes big ticket items such as $422 billion in stimulus checks to individuals, $350 billion for state and local governments, and $242 billion for expanded unemployment benefits.
 But in terms of dollars, there’s a big difference between $14 billion and $20 billion or $25 billion.
 The point is, it’s possible to use percentages to make an amount appear small, and actual dollars to make the same amount look substantial.
 Context helps
 The most heated debate in Congress centers on how the American Rescue Plan deals with the economic damage of the pandemic.
 McConnell’s claim has more to do with the money aimed most directly at the virus and pandemic itself. In that vein, focussing strictly on vaccines leaves out a lot of the picture. 
 The biggest overlooked piece is $46 billion for testing and other surveillance work. 
 That work is as important as any other, said Amesh Adalja at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. Better surveillance helps target vaccine distribution to certain states or communities, and is part of spotting virus mutations to improve the next generation of vaccines.
 "There is a continuum and integration between all response activities," Adajla said. "Those include testing, tracing, isolating and vaccinating."
 Vaccines have to make their way into people’s arms, and the legislation funds several programs to support that work, including $7.6 billion to hire 100,000 community health workers.
 We found different ways to add up all the spending tied directly to COVID-19. On the low end, the total is about $100 billion. On the high end, the White House says it is $160 billion, which adds items such as $10 billion in medical supplies, $24 billion in child care for health care and other essential workers, and literally dozens of smaller amounts.
 Depending on which line items you include, the legislation would spend anywhere from 4.5% to 8.5% of the total cost directly on the pandemic’s health aspects.
 Our ruling
 McConnell said that in the American Rescue Plan, "just about 1% of the money is for vaccines." Based on Democratic figures of either $14 billion or $20 billion for vaccines, and a $1.9 trillion overall price tag, the math is about right.
 The American Rescue Plan spends much more on the financial damage caused by the virus than on its health aspects alone, and McConnell picked a way to minimize the health-related spending. The statistic omits a much greater amount of spending on overall efforts to contain the pandemic. That ranges from about $100 billion to $160 billion, or between 5% and 8% of the bill’s total cost.
 His statement is accurate, but needs additional information. That’s our definition of Mostly True.
As Washington scrambled to prop up businesses stung by the impact of COVID-19, President Donald Trump reportedly threatened to reject a version of the recently-signed stimulus package that contained funding for the U.S. Postal Service.
 According to the Washington Post, Trump would have blocked the CARES Act had it included a $13 billion grant for the Postal Service instead of the $10 billion loan from the final version.
 
 Trump has long been critical of the Postal Service, saying as recently as April 7 that the service "has lost billions of dollars every year" and has an unfair relationship with Amazon. 
 But a widespread Facebook post says Trump’s frustrations are misguided, and that members of his own party are actually to blame for the Postal Service’s financial problems.
 "The Postal Service is not losing money because of Amazon," the post says. "It’s losing money because in 2006, the Republican-led Congress passed a law forcing it to prepay its pensions for 75 years, which no other corporation does. This was meant to bankrupt it so it’s business could be privatized for profit. Without this law, the Postal Service would be turning a profit."
 The post has been around more than a year, but it was picked up April 13 by the AFL-CIO, a federation of labor unions. It was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat potential false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 In this case, the post is accurate in some ways, and misleading in others. Kalina Newman, a spokesperson for the AFL-CIO, cited a 2010 Postal Service report and a CNBC article.
 A lame-duck Republican Congress did pass a financially burdensome law in 2006 requiring the Postal Service to pre-fund health benefits for future retirees, and the service’s deal with Amazon hasn’t proven to be the money drain that Trump has said it is. But the service has more financial problems than just the requirements of the 2006 law.
 We won’t weigh in on whether the law was "meant to bankrupt" the Postal Service.
 Background on the Postal Service
 The Postal Service is a unique agency. It's meant to be self-sustaining, paying for itself from the money it makes off postage and other daily mail services. 
 But it also has to follow rules set by Congress that result in higher costs — notably, it’s expected to deliver mail daily and keep postage rates flat for all parts of the country.
 The rise of the internet tanked the volume of first-class mail in circulation, which peaked in 2001 and has dropped every year since. Costs, on the other hand, haven’t gone down. 
 The coronavirus has sent those problems spiraling out of control. Mail volumes have declined and sales are "plummeting," Postmaster General Megan Brennan said in a recent statement.
 
 A U.S. Postal worker makes a delivery with gloves and a mask in Warren, Michigan, on April 2, 2020. (AP/Sancya)
 "We now estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic will increase the Postal Service’s net operating loss by more than $22 billion dollars over the next 18 months, and by over $54 billion dollars over the longer term," Brennan said.
 Amazon has been a bright spot
 While the Postal Service has seen declines in first-class and marketing mail, growth in shipping and packaging — which includes Amazon — has been a bright spot. 
 In 2019, the Postal Service reported a net loss of $8.8 billion, but the shipping and packages segment of its business increased revenue by $1.3 billion, or 6.1%, over 2018.
 Amazon and other bulk suppliers do get a special rate, as the Postal Service provides discounts to companies for which it does last-mile delivery. But it’s at least a break-even venture. 
 That’s because the 2006 Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act — the law responsible for the retiree health benefit requirement — made it illegal for the Postal Service to price parcel delivery below its cost. One study said the Postal Service could be charging more, however. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
  
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The health benefit requirement
 The 2006 law also established a fund for Postal Service retiree health benefits. It required prepayment of those benefits according to a 50-year schedule, starting with 10 years of statutorily prescribed payments of roughly $5 billion from 2007 to 2017. 
 Previously, the service funded the benefits on a pay-as-you-go basis.
 The act was passed by a Republican-led Congress. But it dealt with retiree health benefits, not pensions, said David Partenheimer, a spokesman for the Postal Service.
 There’s also some confusion over whether the Postal Service was forced to prepay benefits "for 75 years," as the Facebook post said. The language of the law doesn’t mention 75 years, and Partenheimer said the Postal Service has not used that timeframe to describe the requirement.
 In 2012, the Government Accountability Office said the act "did not require USPS to prefund 75 years of retiree health benefits over a 10-year period" but that the "payments would be projected to fund the liability over a period in excess of 50 years, from 2007 through 2056 and beyond."
 Regardless, Partenheimer told us that "the pre-funding requirement included in the 2006 law is a major reason for our financial situation, along with an outdated business model."
 The Postal Service began defaulting on its payments in 2012. A fact sheet said that without defaulting, the service "would not have been able to pay our employees, our suppliers, or deliver the mail" — a point the postmaster general reiterated in 2019 congressional testimony.
 James O’Rourke, a teaching professor of management at the University of Notre Dame, said the Facebook post is "more-or-less correct" about the 2006 law.
 "This advance funding requirement places a burden of about $6.6 billion on the postal service that would not exist if they followed a pay-as-you-go approach," O’Rourke said. "This burden has quite nearly bankrupted the USPS over a 15-year period."
 But Jim Campbell, a private attorney and an expert on postal service laws, said the 2006 law also freed the Postal Service of a prior obligation to cover pension costs for military service its employees completed before joining the Postal Service. 
 A 2009 report from the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service said that shift relieved the Postal Service of a $27 billion cost. Campbell said that when the 2006 law was enacted, it was expected that relief from prior costs would "more or less completely offset the new obligation."
 Still, no other federal agency faces a similar pre-funding mandate, O’Rourke said. Private companies that do pre-fund their future retirees’ health benefits don’t usually cover 100% of those costs in advance, a 2015 CRS report said.
 Would the Postal Service be turning a profit otherwise?
 The Facebook post suggests that if the Postal Service could get rid of the 2006 law, everything else would be fine. But the reality is more bleak — especially now.
 "The problem with the Postal Service is just much more fundamental than this," Campbell said.
 It does appear that the law’s elimination would have brought some relief. The progressive Institute for Policy Studies wrote that "if the costs of this retiree health care mandate were removed from the USPS financial statements," the Postal Service would’ve reported operating profits from 2013 through 2018. That’s accurate, according to a chart from the Trump administration’s 2018 report on the Postal Service.
 In congressional testimony last year, Postal Service board member David Williams said the pre-funding requirement has been "devastating" not only because it limited other spending, but also because it "wiped out our entire ability to make capital investments" to modernize.
 Still, as we noted in 2011, the Postal Service’s problems are greater than the retirement rules. 
 The service’s own fact sheet says a House bill to scrap the pre-funding requirement "will not reduce our underlying liability for retiree health benefits, nor improve our cash flow or long-term financial position." COVID-19 has worsened that position further in recent weeks.
 "The USPS is forecast to lose tens of billions of dollars over the next decade," the Trump administration’s 2018 report said. "Standalone proposals, such as forgiving the prefunding of post-employment benefits or renegotiating labor contracts, will be insufficient."
 "If left unattended, closure of the U.S. Postal Service in the years just ahead remains a possibility," O’Rourke added.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said: "The Postal Service is not losing money because of Amazon. It’s losing money because in 2006, the Republican-led Congress passed a law forcing it to prepay its pensions for 75 years, which no other corporation does … Without this law, the Postal Service would be turning a profit."
 The Postal Service isn’t losing money from its deal with Amazon. But the 2006 law requiring the pre-funding of health benefits for future retirees — not pensions — has put a financial strain on the Postal Service and hurt its ability to turn a profit in some recent years. 
 However, the Postal Service has more financial problems than just the requirements of the law. 
 We rate this statement Half True.
While explaining why his family would not be together celebrating Thanksgiving this year, Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker blasted online accusations that his daughter broke COVID-19 protocols at a restaurant gathering.
 "A parody Twitter account posted a picture of a group of individuals eating outside a Chicago restaurant, supposedly breaking the COVID rules the city put in place," Pritzker said at a Nov. 17 press conference. "And the person posting the photo claimed one of the people in it was my daughter."
 "My office put out a statement making clear this wasn’t my daughter," Pritzker said. "But that didn’t stop Republican elected officials, a network of propaganda publications in the state and some radio shock jocks from telling people that the picture was of my daughter, despite knowing that this was a lie."
 Pritzker said his teenage daughter, Teddi, was in Florida with his wife, and would "remain there indefinitely" because she had started receiving "hateful and threatening messages."
 Teddi is not identifiable among the group of 14 diners in the published photo. So we decided to find out where the misinformation came from and who had shared it. What we learned shows the governor was correct about how the rumors spread.
 The photo was originally shared on Twitter by an account called @deuxmoiworld, according to a thread written by Pritzker’s chief of staff, Anne Caprara. That account links to a website that describes it as a purveyor of "rumors and conjecture." By the time we checked it, the image was deleted and the account’s operator had apologized for sharing it.
 But the image was already being spread on other Twitter accounts, Caprara documented in her thread, including one that described itself as "a parody account."
 Then a website with connections to conservative political operatives called Chicago City Wire picked it up, publishing a post based solely on the parody account’s tweet. That account’s tweets are now private. The story does not say which person in the photo is purportedly Pritzker’s daughter nor what date the photo was taken, though servers in the background are wearing masks.
 Chicago City Wire is produced by Local Government Information Services, a company run by conservative radio talk show host Dan Proft, state records show.
 In October, Proft was featured in a New York Times investigation into a nationwide string of local sites that purport to be news sites, but are instead vehicles for stories ordered up by GOP groups and corporate PR firms. In 2015, Proft teamed up with another controversial internet entrepreneur, Brian Timpone, to start a chain of such publications in Illinois.
 Proft and Timpone did not respond to requests for comment.
 Following complaints to the Illinois Board of Elections about political funding behind the Illinois sites, the Times reported, a disclaimer on their "About" pages now says they are funded, "in part, by advocacy groups who share our beliefs in limited government." That disclaimer now appears on Chicago City Wire.
 We confirmed with Pritzker’s office these were the websites he was referring to as "propaganda publications."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Propaganda includes "ideas, facts, or allegations spread deliberately to further one's cause or to damage an opposing cause," according to Merriam-Webster. While there’s room for disagreement about the perimeters of the term, Pritzker’s use of it to describe these sites is reasonable in light of the New York Times’ findings.
 Pritzker’s spokeswoman also pointed to Proft’s radio show, Chicago’s Morning Answer to explain his reference to "radio shock jocks" sharing the story.
 On the Nov. 13 episode of the show, a listener called in to ask co-host Amy Jacobson and a guest host if they would confront the governor about City Wire’s story.
 Jacobson dismissed that suggestion, but still gave credence to the claim that Teddi was pictured, saying, "I’m glad that she’s out socializing outside, I’m glad that she’s living and not existing."
 When reached by phone, Jacobson declined to comment for this fact-check.
 Several state Republican lawmakers also chose to share the post, backing up the most serious portion of Pritzker’s claim.
 "Like I’ve been saying from the beginning, this is how you handle a lockdown!" Rep. Darren Bailey of Xenia wrote in a Facebook post sharing the City Wire story. Bailey’s post has since been shared by more than 700 of his followers.
 Rep. Grant Wehrli of Naperville also retweeted a post from a Twitter user who shared the story. That user has since apologized for spreading false information and deleted her original tweet.
 Neither Bailey nor Wehrli responded to email inquiries or calls to their district offices asking why they believed the post was credible.
 Our ruling
 Pritzker said "Republican elected officials, a network of propaganda publications in the state and some radio shock jocks" were spreading "a lie" about his daughter dining outside at a restaurant with a large group of people during the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The false claim Pritzker is referring to is based on a photograph of 14 individuals gathered around a table, none of which are identifiable as his daughter. It was spread by gossip and parody accounts on Twitter before being picked up by a website operated by a company that accepts money from partisan groups and is run by a conservative talk show radio host whose co-host later repeated the claim on-air. While definitions of "propaganda" may vary, Pritzker’s use of the term here is reasonable given the context. Two GOP state lawmakers also shared the post on social media.
 We rate Pritzker’s claim True.
 
 TRUE — The statement is accurate and there’s nothing significant missing.
 Click here for more on the six PolitiFact ratings and how we select facts to check.
As Floridians have returned to the beaches after shutdown orders were lifted, they have been leaving behind garbage.
 "Beachgoers trash Florida beaches with 13,000 pounds of litter after beaches reopen," stated a headline on the Truththeory website and posted on Facebook May 12, 2020.
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) But in this case, the Facebook post has some truth to it.
 We found that the number of 13,000 pounds was correct, however it would have been more accurate to refer to the materials as "garbage" rather than "litter" because some of it was found in trash bins. Also, it was a reference to one specific beach in the state, as explained in the story.
 The Facebook post cites a May 9 article by Florida Today about the amount of garbage found on Cocoa Beach once restrictions were lifted.
 Starting in late March and then April, the city of Cocoa Beach posted rules that significantly limited use of the beach including the hours, parking and group sizes. But in recent weeks those rules were loosened -- and that’s when the garbage piled up.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The city has a contract with Keep Brevard Beautiful to pick up litter on about a five-mile stretch of Cocoa Beach. Typically, they collect between 30 and 50 bags per day, executive director Bryan Bobbitt told PolitiFact. Each bag weighs 40 to 50 pounds.
 On Friday, May 1, the organization collected about 33 bags. That grew to 122 bags on Saturday and 142 on Sunday. 
 In total over that weekend, about 13,560 pounds of garbage was removed, City Manager James McKnight told PolitiFact. Most of the trash was in trash cans or bagged next to trash cans, he said, however a significant amount was picked up directly from the beach itself. 
 The police department announced it would fine violators $250 for littering.
 Our ruling
 A headline said "beachgoers trash Florida beaches with 13,000 pounds of litter after beaches reopen." 
 That referred to the amount of garbage collected during the first weekend in May at Cocoa Beach. It was the amount of garbage collected from trash bins as well as from the beach, which means it wasn’t all improperly discarded litter.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
With an increasing number of coronavirus cases across the country, President Donald Trump pointed to a metric that reflects more favorably on his administration’s pandemic response.
 On June 23, Trump tweeted, "Cases up only because of our big number testing. Mortality rate way down!!!"
 Cases up only because of our big number testing. Mortality rate way down!!! https://t.co/bKFmgOLEGZ— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 23, 2020 
 His argument that tests are the only reason for rising cases is not accurate. But on the trend for mortality, Trump has a point.
 Epidemiologists told PolitiFact that due to wide variations in testing patterns, the data doesn’t offer a clear look at how likely someone is to die from the virus if they are infected with it. Gaps in testing leave too many undiagnosed cases to reliably determine a person’s likelihood of dying from the coronavirus, much less whether the likelihood of dying has risen or fallen over time.
 Instead, researchers say, the most solid metric for assessing Trump’s statement is the number of new coronavirus deaths reported per day.
 The number of daily deaths from coronavirus has been falling consistently since peaking in late April. In fact, even as infections have risen since early June, deaths have not. (The orange line in the following chart shows the seven-day rolling average of coronavirus deaths, which smooths out data variations.)
 
 
 At the peak in late April, more than 2,000 were dying from coronavirus on a typical day. In late June, it’s less than 600. That’s still a large number of deaths every day. All told, roughly 115,000 have died from COVID-19 to date.
 The White House told PolitiFact that the per-capita number of deaths in the United States is also lower than it is in several advanced industrialized countries in Europe that were hard hit by the virus. According to Johns Hopkins University, the number of coronavirus deaths per 100,000 population is about 37 for the United States, compared with 65 in the United Kingdom, 61 in Spain, and 57 in Italy.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But other European countries have lower death rates for COVID-19 than the United States does, including the Netherlands, Ireland, Germany, Switzerland and Denmark. 
 So why are deaths falling? There may be several reasons, and for now, they’re somewhat speculative.
 One possibility is that the initial wave of infections disproportionately reached more patients with weaker immune systems, including those in nursing homes, or more vulnerable Americans who hadn’t yet taken up effective social distancing. By contrast, more recent waves of infections may be reaching younger and healthier people who are better able to survive an infection.
 Another possibility is that we’re "getting better at treatment and keeping people alive," said Tara Smith, an epidemiologist at Kent State University’s College of Public Health.
 Still, epidemiologists caution that deaths are a lagging indicator. The disease often takes two to three weeks to run its course, meaning that one day’s crop of new infections tends to drive the deaths that occur two to three weeks later.
 "We might not expect an increase in the death rate until approximately 21 days from when we started to see an increase in cases," said Brooke Nichols, an infectious disease modeler at the Boston University School of Public Health.
 So far, the age breakdown for deaths has been fairly consistent — people older than 65 accounted for 81% of coronavirus deaths at the mortality peak in mid-April, and that age group still accounted for 82% of in mid-July, a time when the total number of deaths had fallen significantly, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 Since we’re about two weeks into the national rise in infections, scientists will be watching to see if deaths start increasing a week from now.
 Our ruling
 Trump said that mortality from coronavirus is "way down."
 This is one of the few coronavirus measurements that Trump can point to with optimism. The number of deaths has remained substantial, at a bit below 600 per day by mid-to-late June, but that’s more than two-thirds lower than the peak of about 2,000 daily deaths in late April. The number of coronavirus deaths per day has continued to fall in June even as the number of cases has risen. 
 Trump’s statement is accurate for now, though it’s too soon to know whether the recent rise in new cases will produce an uptick in deaths by early July. We rate his statement Mostly True.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo continues to defend his administration’s handling of COVID-19 in nursing homes following a high-profile independent investigation. Compared to the rest of the country, nursing home deaths linked to the virus are below average, Cuomo said.
 State Attorney General Letitia James revealed in a report on Jan. 28 that the death toll from the virus among residents of nursing homes had been undercounted in data released by the state Health Department. The report found that the Health Department had reported the overall number of COVID-19 deaths among all state residents accurately. The administration had said it did not want to double count nursing home residents who died in hospitals. So their deaths in hospitals were not counted as part of the nursing home death toll. The administration has since said the numbers of people transferred from nursing homes to hospitals "is an important data point." 
 "If you look at New York state, we have a lower percentage of deaths in nursing homes than other states," Cuomo said during a press briefing on Jan. 29. "A third of all deaths in this nation are from nursing homes. New York state, we are only at about 28 percent - only. But we’re below the national average in number of deaths in nursing homes."
 We approached the Cuomo administration for the source of its data. 
 The governor’s staff directed us to a statement from Dr. Howard Zucker, the state’s health commissioner, from Jan. 28. 
 In response to the attorney general’s report, Zucker cited data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and KFF, formerly the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonpartisan source of health information. 
 According to the Health Department, from March 1, 2020, to Jan. 19, 2021, there were 9,786 confirmed deaths of skilled nursing facility residents, including 5,957 in nursing facilities and 3,829 in hospitals. Zucker cautioned that the department’s audit is ongoing, but these figures represent audited data so far. The nursing home residents who died from COVID-19 account for 28 percent of New York’s 34,742 confirmed fatalities, which is below the national average, Zucker said. 
 Zucker compared KFF data to CDC data to calculate that nationally 35 percent of total deaths affect nursing home residents. 
 Across the country, KFF’s tally is 146,888 long-term care fatalities, as of Jan. 22. This figure includes some nursing home staff members, as well as residents, in the areas of the country where this data is reported. The CDC reported 423,519 total deaths as of Jan. 26, 2021. 
 Adding the number of deaths of nursing home residents who had presumed cases of COVID-19 -- 2,957 -- brings the New York percentage of nursing home deaths to 29.8 percent, still below the national average, Zucker said. 
 We asked a senior policy analyst with KFF about Cuomo’s claim. 
 Priya Chidambaram, who studies COVID-19 in nursing homes, told PolitiFact on Feb. 5 that Cuomo’s claim is consistent with the available data. 
 "No matter which way you cut it, the New York share does appear to be lower than the national average," Chidambaram said. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In October, we fact-checked Cuomo’s claim that New York was "No. 46 out of 50 states... we're 46th in terms of percentage of deaths in nursing homes," and found it to be Mostly False. That’s because Cuomo was comparing New York to other states while not releasing data about deaths of nursing home residents in hospitals, which would have changed New York’s ranking. 
 KFF also warns that because states report data differently, "data cannot be compared between states." 
 Comparing New York to a national average "is a more fair reading of where New York ranks," Chidambaram said. 
 We also spoke with Robert Applebaum, a gerontology professor who tracks COVID-19 nursing home data at Miami University, which has a partnership with AARP. 
 "I would say that our data continued to show that New York state deaths are on average, per hundred, below the national average by a fair amount," Applebaum said. 
 People who study the virus in nursing homes warn that data can be incomplete. States have different procedures for collecting and reporting data, such as collecting information about residents and staff, as well as the types of care facilities that are included. 
 The Covid Tracking Project, an independent research initiative, found that as of Jan. 28, the last data release before Cuomo’s statement, 157,069 long-term care residents, including assisted living facilities, and 423,645 people had died of the virus nationwide, presumed and confirmed cases. Long-term care residents represent 37 percent of total deaths in this case. In New York, 25.2 percent of total deaths involved long-term care residents, according to the Covid Tracking Project, though researchers caution that the data could represent an undercount. 
 A week after Cuomo made his statement, the New York numbers changed significantly. 
 The Cuomo administration released more data, through Feb. 4, about COVID-19-related deaths of people who lived in nursing homes. Presumed and confirmed virus-related deaths total 13,163, according to an analysis from the Empire Center, a conservative think tank that sued the administration for nursing home data. On Feb. 5, Cuomo announced overall deaths totaled 35,920, meaning the 36.6 percent of virus deaths were related to nursing homes. The Covid Tracking Project’s national average of deaths of long-term care facility residents, as of Feb. 7, was 36 percent. KFF calculated the national average of long-term care deaths as a percentage of total deaths at 37 percent, as of Feb. 8. 
 At PolitiFact, we base our rulings on information available at the time the person we are fact-checking made the statement. 
 Our ruling
 Cuomo said that New York’s coronavirus-related death toll of nursing home residents was below the national average. Nationally, long-term care residents account for about 37 percent of COVID-19 deaths, according to KFF. 
 Data from KFF, the federal government and New York state show that New York’s nursing home-related deaths, as a percentage of overall COVID-19 deaths, were below the national average at the time of Cuomo’s claim. Since then, new data about the deaths of all nursing home residents, regardless of where they died, raised the percentage of nursing home residents among the state's COVID-19 fatalities. It is still slightly below the national average calculated by KFF.
 While his statement is accurate, there are still inconsistencies among the states in how they calculate their nursing home data, and that needs to be taken into account.
 So we rate Cuomo’s claim Mostly True.
Sen. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., said that everyone should be able to vote by mail if they want to this year — and that the vast majority of the public agrees with her.
 Klobuchar in March proposed a bill that gives states more money to handle increased mail-in voting and to make in-person voting sites safer amid a pandemic. She said that she doesn’t want to make everyone vote by mail, but that it is a safer option. The Republican-led Senate has not voted on the bill.
 "The voters are with us, the people are with us," she said. "80% of the people want this option and they want to have the polls open early." (She made that statement in a conversation with Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison April 24 and tweeted a portion May 16.)
 We found that Klobuchar’s figure was close to one reported in a poll by a liberal group. Other national polls have found majority support for voting by mail, though not support levels as high as what Klobuchar cited.
 "It is correct to conclude that a strong majority of voters support vote-by-mail options," said Janine Parry, University of Arkansas political science professor who was not involved in the poll.
 Klobuchar noted that more than a dozen states require voters to give a reason for voting by mail. In some states, any qualified voter may vote by mail, while five states conduct all elections entirely by mail: Colorado, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington and Utah.
 While President Donald Trump and some GOP leaders have opposed efforts to expand voting by mail, concerns about the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 is expected to increase demand for absentee ballots among people who fear exposure at in-person voting sites. Klobuchar’s bill, which was written with Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., has no GOP co-sponsors, but some Republican governors and election officials have advocated for more voting by mail, too.
 RELATED: Does voting by mail lead to higher turnout in red, blue and purple states? It’s not that simple
 Polls show support for voting by mail
 Klobuchar’s spokesman said she was referring to a poll done for the liberal Brennan Center at New York University School of Law. The online poll of 1,550 Democrats, Republicans and independents in March asked respondents, "Do you agree or disagree that: in the 2020 election, all states should be required to allow vote by mail or unexcused absentee ballots to ensure people can vote with ease and without being in long lines or crowds?"
 In response, 78% said they agreed. Support was higher among Democrats (97%) and independents (79%) than Republicans (57%).
 Polling experts noted that Brennan asked the question in a way that suggests positive reasons for voting by mail, which can lead to higher support among respondents.
 The question was worded in a way that puts voting by mail in the current context of the pandemic, said Joel Benenson of the Benenson Strategy Group, which conducted the poll for Brennan. He argued that phrasing the question in a generic way doesn’t make sense because the current conversation is about changing policies this year for the pandemic, not permanently. 
 The phrasing was different from the questions in a poll done for the Republican National Committee. That poll asked voters of both parties and independents for their views on "mailing a ballot to all registered voters, including those who are inactive, meaning they have not voted in recent elections and not responded to an address verification mailing or have moved." The results showed 53% opposed that idea. 
 A separate question from that same RNC poll asked "And, if your state changed current voting procedures to enact universal vote by mail, would you be concerned about the integrity of the election results and the ability for widespread fraud?" Sixty-two percent answered yes. 
 We asked the RNC why it didn’t ask a straight question about respondents’ views on voting by mail. Mandi Merritt, an RNC spokeswoman, said that Democrats are suing states to make changes to voting by mail such as eliminating signature verification or sending ballots to inactive voters, so "we felt it was important to gauge public opinion accordingly."
 "You can frame the question in ways that move the percentages up or down in support of mail in voting," said John G. Geer, co-director of the Vanderbilt poll (who wasn’t involved in these vote by mail polls).
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National polls done in April by nonpartisan media outlets or research groups showed between 58% and 72% favoring voting by mail overall. That’s lower than the Brennan poll but still majority support. These polls also showed that support for voting by mail was higher among Democrats than Republicans, mirroring what the Brennan Center poll found. 
 
 
 A Reuters/Ipsos poll found 72% of all U.S. adults supported a requirement for mail-in ballots for this year. The online poll surveyed 1,116 American adults.
 
 
 Pew Research’s web poll of 4,917 U.S. adults found 70% favor allowing any voter to vote by mail if they want to this year.
 
 
 Gallup’s telephone poll asked 1,016 voters if they would "favor or oppose your state allowing all voters to vote by mail or absentee ballot in this year's presidential election?" Results showed that 64% favor their state allowing all voters to vote by mail or absentee ballot. 
 
 
 AP/NORC found that if the pandemic lasts through November, 60% favor allowing voters to cast ballots by mail without a stated reason.
 
 
 An NBC News/Wall Street Journal telephone poll of 900 registered voters found that 58% favored changing laws to allow everyone to vote by mail. For those who said they oppose changing laws, an additional 9% said they would support changing election laws for the November election amid the coronavirus.
 
 
 Overall, surveys show support for voting by mail, but polling experts offered some important caveats. 
 There is a difference between supporting vote by mail without an excuse and supporting efforts to automatically mail ballots — or even ballot applications — to all registered voters, said Barry Burden, University of Wisconsin political science professor, who was not involved in these polls. 
 He noted that while the Pew survey found 70% favor allowing vote by mail, a smaller percentage — 52% — support conducting all elections by mail.
 The polls could be measuring what pollsters call "non-attitudes" — meaning the respondents had not formed an opinion before being contacted by a pollster, said professor Andrew Smith, director of the University of New Hampshire Survey Center.
 "It’s highly doubtful that many respondents had thought at all about voting by mail before they were interviewed, and the differences in wording of the questions shows how malleable opinions can be," he said. "I’m concerned that these polls are creating public opinion rather than seeking to measure it!"
 Health concerns fueled by the pandemic reinforces favorable thoughts about voting by mail, Geer said.
 "Citizens, regardless of partisan stripe, favor more participation over less," he said. "It is a general tendency and explains why voting by mail is popular."
 RELATED: How battleground states are preparing for the pandemic election’s massive increase in voting by mail
 Our ruling
 Klobuchar said "80% of the people" want the option of voting by mail.
 Klobuchar was citing a poll done by the Brennan Center in late March which found 78% of respondents agreed that all states should be required to allow voting by mail to ensure people can vote with ease and while avoiding lines and crowds. 
 Klobuchar has cherry-picked a poll by a liberal group that framed the question in a way that portrayed voting by mail as positive, and resulted in higher support than many other national polls.
 The other national polls showed support between 58% and 72% for voting by mail.
 We rate this statement Half True.
President Donald Trump and top health officials in his administration are now openly at odds over hydroxychloroquine.
 Both Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Deborah Birx, coronavirus response coordinator for the White House task force, have said careful studies show the drug doesn’t speed recovery from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus.
 Still, at an Aug. 3 White House event, Trump said he has taken hydroxychloroquine and it is "very highly thought of." Trump said the drug is politically toxic because he supports it.
 On NBC’s Meet the Press, Adm. Brett Giroir, the assistant secretary of health and overseer of the virus testing effort, said it is time to "move on."
 "There have been five randomized controlled, placebo controlled trials that do not show any benefit to Hydroxychloroquine," Giroir said Aug. 2. "So, at this point in time, we don't recommend that as a treatment. "
 We asked Giroir’s office to name the five studies he referenced in that interview. Not all of them used placebos, but they all randomly assigned patients to hydroxychloroquine treatment and conventional treatment groups. The drug proved itself in none of them.
 Before we summarize the studies, a brief word about why this sort of study matters.
 How to control for the unseen
 If you want to know if a drug works, ideally the only difference between a patient who gets it and one who doesn’t is — no surprise — the drug itself. That’s harder to do than meets the eye. People aren’t identical. You can weigh them, look at their medical histories, check their blood oxygen levels and temperature, and yet, you still might miss something.
 That’s where randomly assigning patients to treatment and non-treatment groups comes in.
 "You don’t know all the possible things going on in the background and all that noise is what randomizing helps filter out," said Boston University infectious disease modeler Brooke Nichols. "It’s the best way to be sure that the only effect is the effect of the drug."
 Letting a computer program assign patients also prevents any subconscious choices by doctors from distorting the results. The whole approach is designed to take human foibles out of the picture.
 To really minimize the human factor, not only do you randomly assign patients to groups, but the patients and the health care workers themselves don’t know what group they are in. So everyone gets a pill, but for half of them, the pill might be just sugar or something equally neutral. That neutral pill is a placebo.
 "That’s the gold-gold standard of research," said Nichols. "And just one one small notch below that is the randomized controlled trial without a placebo."
 Nichols said that the lack of a placebo takes on more importance when a non-placebo study comes up with different results than one with a placebo.
 "When the results are in agreement, it doesn’t matter as much," Nichols said.
 The studies
 Giroir’s office sent us a list of the studies he had in mind. All of them used the randomized control approach. Two of them used placebos, and three did not. They all found the drug ineffective. Here’s Giroir’s list (plus a couple more we found ourselves):
 A Cluster-Randomized Trial of Hydroxychloroquine as Prevention of Covid-19 Transmission and Disease, MedRxIV, July 26, 2020. No placebo. This study out of Spain aimed to see if the drug prevented the disease. It involved about 2,300 people who had been exposed to someone who tested positive for the virus. After random assignment, one group got a dose of hydroxychloroquine for a week, and the other didn’t.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The differences were small, too small to be statistically significant. In the treatment group, 5.7% caught the virus. In the non-treatment group, 6.2% did. 
 "Post-exposure therapy with hydroxychloroquine did not prevent SARS-CoV-2 disease and infection," the authors wrote.
 Hydroxychloroquine with or without Azithromycin in Mild-to-Moderate Covid-19, New England Journal of Medicine, July 23, 2020. No placebo. This study from Brazil assigned 665 patients (504 with testing-confirmed COVID-19) to three groups: standard care, hydroxychloroquine plus azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine alone. 
 "Among patients hospitalized with mild-to-moderate COVID-19, the use of hydroxychloroquine, alone or with azithromycin, did not improve clinical status at 15 days as compared with standard care," the authors wrote.
 Hydroxychloroquine in Nonhospitalized Adults With Early COVID-19, Annals of Internal Medicine, July 16, 2020. Placebo used. This study of 491 patients in the United States and Canada used two groups: one receiving hydroxychloroquine and the other a placebo. Participants either tested positive, or had the symptoms of COVID-19 and lived or worked with someone who had tested positive. They could not have had symptoms for more than four days.
 "We hypothesized that starting hydroxychloroquine therapy within the first few days of symptoms could alter the course of COVID-19 by reducing symptom severity and duration and preventing hospitalizations," the authors wrote.
 They found that the severity of symptoms after 14 days "did not differ between the hydroxychloroquine and placebo groups." 
 No clinical benefit from use of hydroxychloroquine in hospitalised patients with COVID-19, Recovery Trial - University of Oxford, June 5, 2020. No placebo. This study out of the United Kingdom randomly assigned over 4,600 patients hospitalized with COVID-19 to a hydroxychloroquine treatment group and a standard care group. Researchers measured the death rate and symptoms after 28 days.
 Among the treatment group, 25.7% died, compared to 23.5% for the standard care group. That was not statistically different. And there were no "beneficial effects on hospital stay duration or other outcomes."
 "Although it is disappointing that this treatment has been shown to be ineffective, it does allow us to focus care and research on more promising drugs.," the researchers wrote.
 The data has yet to be released.
 A Randomized Trial of Hydroxychloroquine as Postexposure Prophylaxis for Covid-19, New England Journal of Medicine, June 3, 2020. Placebo used. This study focused on hydroxychloroquine as a way to avoid getting the disease. They randomly assigned 821 people with no symptoms — but who had spent time close to a person who tested positive — to a treatment or placebo group.
 The hydroxychloroquine group was slightly less likely to test positive after two weeks, 11.8% compared to 14.3% in the placebo group, but the numbers were too small to pass statistical muster.
 We found two other randomized controlled studies in addition to those Grigoir referenced. One out of Spain worked with 293 people with confirmed infections, but who were not hospitalized. There was no placebo. They found that hydroxychloroquine did not cut the risk of hospitalization, or help people recover more quickly.
 An early study in May in Shanghai, China, assigned 75 COVID-19 patients to a hydroxychloroquine treatment group, and another received typical care. It also found no difference in the speed of recovery.
 There has been one large study in Detroit that concluded that the drug worked. However, patient data in that study was collected after the fact and there was no randomized control process.
 Our ruling
 Giroir said there were five "randomized controlled, placebo controlled trials that do not show any benefit to hydroxychloroquine."
 He is largely correct. There have been more than five randomized controlled trials that found hydroxychloroquine ineffective, either at preventing people from catching the virus, or helping them recover if they become ill. He exaggerated the number of studies that used placebos — out of his list, two did and three did not.
 The infectious disease modeler we reached said placebos improve the quality of a study, but the lack of one matters less if the results are in line with placebo-driven trials.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
Seeking to counter the notion that the United States has failed to make progress against the novel coronavirus, President Donald Trump offered a positive statistic during a Sep. 7 news conference.
 "Under Operation Warp Speed, we’ve pioneered groundbreaking therapies, reducing the fatality rate 85 percent since April," Trump said. "You don’t hear that from the press very often. They don’t like to talk about that. So the fatality rate, 85% — think of that — since April."
 When we asked the White House for supporting evidence, they provided the following chart, which they said was compiled by Stanford University School of Medicine professor Jay Bhattacharya. The time frame is somewhat different from what Trump cited, but the trend line is roughly the same.
 
 The chart shows the case-fatality rate for coronavirus between mid-March and mid-July. That statistic refers to the number of coronavirus deaths divided by the number of known coronavirus cases — effectively, the likelihood that you will die from coronavirus if you are known to have been infected. (The data adjusts for the typical lag time between infection and death by pairing the infection data with the death data from two weeks later.)
 According to the White House’s chart, close to one-third of people who were infected in mid-March ended up dying from the virus. By late April, that rate had fallen to 5%. That’s roughly an 85% decline. (The statistic does not take into account specific risk factors for the disease that an individual may have, and instead looks at the population as a whole. So a person with risk factors may have a greater likelihood of dying, while one without risk factors would have a smaller likelihood.)
 Bhattacharya told PolitiFact that the chart shows "a very sharp drop in the case fatality rate from COVID-19 infection in the U.S. since the beginning of the epidemic — people are more likely to survive after infection than they were. It seems very important to me for the public to understand that the lethality of the infection is not what it was when impressions first formed in March. The experience of the Northeast with the epidemic in those early days is atypical of the experience of people infected now."
 However, Trump’s focus on this one data point also needs some additional context. The reasons for the drop are not entirely from improved therapies, and Operation Warp Speed, the administration’s effort to devise countermeasures against the virus, doesn’t necessarily get the credit for the drop.
 Why did the case fatality rate fall?
 Part of the decline likely stems from reasons other than better treatments, said Tara C. Smith, a professor of Epidemiology at Kent State University’s College of Public Health.
 One factor is testing. Early on, due in part to shortages in testing equipment, only individuals with significant symptoms were being tested, and those patients would be likelier to end up with a fatal case. Later on, Smith said, testing was catching more individuals with mild symptoms or even no symptoms at all, which helped decrease the case-fatality rate.
 To make this concrete, in March 19, as the case-fatality rate was peaking, 27,974 tests were taken nationally, according to data from the COVID Tracking Project. By April 27, the number was 196,080 — a seven-fold increase. By then, the case-fatality rate had fallen significantly. The rate fell further by July 22, when the number of tests had risen to 796,439.
 "Since the denominator of case-fatality is the number of cases detected, the availability of testing and testing practices is a huge driver of the case fatality," said Brooke Nichols, an infectious disease mathematical modeler at the Boston University School of Public Health.
 It is worth noting that the Trump administration has touted its role in expanded testing. But had the same level of testing been in place earlier in the epidemic, the figures on this chart may not have shown the same level of fatality rate decline.
 In addition, the coronavirus was especially deadly to residents in nursing homes early in the pandemic. That coincided with the period of when testing was limited, probably exaggerating the case-fatality rate. Later in the pandemic, nursing homes implemented stronger protections.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Better treatments have helped as well, experts said, including improvements from trial and error in how to treat hospitalized patients, and from additional knowledge gained about what had been an entirely unknown virus just months earlier. The White House told PolitiFact that it considers such improvements the key to the U.S. having a better case-fatality ratio than some other countries, such as the United Kingdom, Italy, and France.
 Sometimes these improvements have stemmed from things like ventilator use or better positioning of patients on their hospital bed.
 In other cases, they have come from the use of drugs, such as an existing steroid known as dexamethasone and experimental drugs such as remdesivir, Bhattacharya said. "Teasing apart exactly how much each treatment advance has mattered is still the subject of scientific work," he said.
 Smith said she expects pharmaceutical advances to eventually be shown to be "a much smaller piece of the pie" than the other factors, such as the scope of testing and the age range of those likely to be tested.
 Meanwhile, it’s doubtful that Operation Warp Speed played much of a role in the decline Trump was referencing. The administration-designed effort, run by the Department of Health and Human Services, does focus to an extent on therapeutics, but its primary goal is to deliver 300 million doses of a safe and effective vaccine by January 2021.
 More to the point, Operation Warp Speed only announced its scope and leadership on May 15, and by that time, the case-fatality rate had already fallen most of the way from its peak.
 Finally, it’s worth noting that case-fatality rate is not the only relevant statistic — and many of the other ones are less flattering to the administration.
 Here’s a chart comparing the decline of the case-fatality rate against daily deaths from coronavirus. (The data we used, from the COVID Tracking Project, was different than what was used in the White House chart, but it shows the same overall pattern.)
 
 
 As the chart shows, having a low case-fatality rate is no guarantee of protection against a surge in deaths. Even though the case fatality rate has been lower than ever in recent weeks, deaths have settled into roughly 1,000 a day, far more daily deaths than when the case-fatality rate was much higher.
 Our ruling
 Trump said, "Under Operation Warp Speed, we’ve pioneered groundbreaking therapies, reducing the fatality rate 85 percent since April."
 The decline in the case-fatality rate from an earlier phase in the epidemic is real and notable, but "groundbreaking therapies" are only part of the reason. 
 When the rate was peaking, it was a period when relatively few Americans were being tested, and when a sizable percentage of those being tested were those who were more seriously ill, including nursing home residents.
 In the meantime, by the time Operation Warp Speed had announced its scope and leadership, most of the decline in the case-fatality rate had already occurred. 
 We rate the statement Half True.
The distinctive spike protein that covers the surface of the COVID-19 virus has inspired numerous misinformed claims about the vaccines that aim to prevent its spread. We have previously fact-checked claims on the purported toxicity of the spike protein relating to COVID-19 vaccines.
 An Oct. 13 paper claiming that the spike protein can cause DNA damage has circulated on social media, causing uncertainty about whether these findings are relevant to the COVID-19 vaccines. Without more context, the title of a YouTube video — "Spike protein goes to nucleus and impairs DNA repair" — may sound alarming.
 The lab-based context in which the study was conducted, however, limits its relevance to real life conditions outside the lab. And the study’s findings should not be directly translated to the COVID-19 vaccines, which use modified versions of the spike protein.
 A blog post about the claim was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 The study in question
 Researchers from two Swedish universities introduced into isolated human kidney cells genetic material containing instructions to produce different proteins that make up the COVID-19 virus, including the spike protein. They then examined where these proteins are primarily located in the cell, and tested whether the proteins affected the cell's DNA damage repair system.
 The researchers found that spike proteins were present in the cell nucleus, the part of the cell that houses DNA. They attributed a reduction in DNA repair efficiency to hindered recruitment of specific proteins involved in the repair process.
 Their findings differ from previous studies that have found the spike protein to be located primarily outside the nucleus. Studies on the related coronavirus that causes SARS have also found its spike protein to be located in areas outside the nucleus. 
 Relevance to vaccines
 There are three main types of COVID-19 vaccines that are currently available or being tested in the U.S. Each one involves introducing modified versions of the spike protein to the body in order to prime the immune system to recognize the COVID-19 virus and build defenses against it. This modified version of the spike protein prevents it from assuming the structure that would normally allow it to fuse with the membranes of other cells, unlike the spike protein coded for in the kidney cell study.
 Unanswered questions also remain.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "There are a lot of caveats before we can say there is a direct correlation between the vaccines and DNA repair," said Andre Hudson, head of the Thomas H. Gosnell School of Life Sciences of the Rochester Institute of Technology.
 One question, for example, is how the genetic material introduced into the kidney cells directed spike protein production: Was it the presence of the spike protein itself, or was it an overabundance of protein that led to their findings? 
 Another question is replication: Can these findings be reproduced in other cell types or viruses that also use spike proteins? Does the age of the cells matter? "A lot of experimental details are still needed before you can make a definitive conclusion," Hudson said.
 The Swedish researchers conducted an in vitro study, meaning it was conducted in a test tube or petri dish in a controlled lab environment. In vitro studies do not necessarily translate directly to what would happen in the much more complex biological environment of the body. 
 Unlike the narrower parameters of an in vitro study, there are multiple cell types, immune responses and DNA repair mechanisms at play in people. "Though they may have evidence that it happened in a cell line in an in vitro system, that doesn't mean that's the way it would act or behave in animals or people," said Hudson. "Many studies have been done in vitro that don't translate to animal model systems."
 Without replication in a study conducted on live animals or people, this study has limited clinical relevance to the COVID-19 vaccines.
 Our ruling
 Blog posts claim that a recent paper shows evidence that the spike protein on the COVID-19 virus can cause DNA damage, raising concerns about COVID-19 vaccine safety.
 The study, however, contradicts findings from previous studies that were also conducted on isolated cells in a lab environment. Until their results are replicated in human studies, this has limited bearing on COVID-19 vaccines.
 We rate the claim Half True.
Should people be worried that the number of COVID-19-related hospitalizations reported in their area might overwhelm health care systems? 
 Posts on social media would have you believe that there’s no cause for alarm — even if cases of COVID-19 are on the rise near you. 
 Tampa nurse Erin Marie Olszewski shared such a post on Instagram.
 "It’s not unusual for hospitals to sit at max or near max capacity on any given day," Olszewski’s post — a screenshot of one of her tweets — reads. "The media would like you to think this is a new thing, but it’s not." 
 Her post on Instagram was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 In an email to PolitiFact, Olszewski pointed to a Johns Hopkins University webpage with weekly hospitalization trends. The data, from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, spans a time period from late July 2020 to the present, and "displays the 7-day trend in overall and COVID-19-specific hospitalization occupancy data."
 The numbers show a fairly steady level of occupied hospital beds over the past year. "COVID is not the reason for busy hospitals," Olszewski wrote in the email. 
 But her post suggests that the impact of rapidly increasing COVID-19-related hospitalizations is routine for health care systems. It’s not, and it’s putting an unusual strain on hospitals.
 Hospitals often run at high capacity 
 Representatives from hospital associations said it isn’t unusual for hospitals to operate close to their maximum capacity. This is because hospitals are continually adjusting their capacity based on demand. 
 "They may have some rooms on a floor or in a specific unit that are physically there, but since they aren’t staffed, they aren’t available for patient use," said Marc Lotter, a spokesperson for the Florida Hospital Association. "Should the need rise, hospitals will staff those beds and make them available." 
 Hospitals are careful to maintain enough capacity for unexpected circumstances and emergencies, Lotter said, but to contain costs, they do not keep rooms staffed or available if they aren’t in use or likely to be needed. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But not all capacity utilization is the same. A heavy load of COVID-19 patients places an unusual strain on hospital capacity.
 As of Aug. 11, HHS data indicates that nationwide, about 76.4% inpatient beds in the U.S. are in use — and 10.5% of those beds are in use for COVID-19-specific reasons. Nationally, 75.4% of ICU beds in the U.S. are in use, and 22.2% of those beds are in use for COVID-19. 
 In Olszewski’s home state of Florida — a recent COVID-19 hotspot — the numbers are far higher: 90.1% of ICU beds are in use, and nearly half of those are being used for COVID-19 patients. Meanwhile, 86.2% of inpatient beds are in use, more than a quarter of them for COVID-19-specific reasons. 
 "There is no question many Florida hospitals are reaching their max capacity and beyond," Lotter said. 
 He referenced Aug. 5 data from his group indicating that 60% of hospitals surveyed in Florida were expecting to face a "critical staffing shortage in the next seven days," which he said would affect capacity. Additionally, 27% of surveyed Florida hospitals expected that they would need to expand into "non-care areas" such as conference rooms and cafeterias, to accommodate patients in the next seven days.
 In areas where COVID-19 patients account for a high percentage of hospitalizations, there are "implications for everyone who needs care for emergent or non-emergent reasons," said Thomas Jordan, a spokesperson for the American Hospital Association.
 "Caring for COVID-19 patients is resource-intensive, including from a materials perspective — PPE, oxygen, etc. — and also from a space perspective," he said. "COVID-19 patients must be isolated from non-COVID-19 patients by either placing them in the same units as other COVID patients or in single occupancy rooms. This makes it more difficult for hospitals to have space for all other non-COVID patients." 
 Jordan also said caring for COVID-19 patients requires "significant staff resources," and noted that at this point in the pandemic "our doctors, nurses and other staff are exhausted."
 In some cases, Jordan noted, hospitals have had to stop other routine business again due to the influx of COVID-19 patients — as they did early on in the pandemic. 
 Our ruling 
 Olszewski said, "It’s not unusual for hospitals to sit at max or near max capacity on any given day."
 Hospitals continually adjust their available beds and staffing according to demand because over-staffing is expensive. So it is not unusual for hospitals to operate near maximum capacity. 
 But not all capacity utilization is the same. COVID-19 places additional strains on space, staff and hospital resources, because infected patients need to be kept isolated from others. Hospital systems in parts of the country where the virus is spreading quickly have had to halt other routine procedures and are running out of available beds and staff. 
 The claim is partly accurate but leaves out important context. We rate this claim Half True.
Face masks have become a go-to accessory in America’s grocery stores and remaining public areas, with some prominent retailers even requiring them for entry.
 But many shoppers have taken it on themselves to go a step further — donning gloves as well.
 This pseudo-surgical garb may feel safer, but is it?
 
 One business that doesn’t think so posted a sign outside banning gloves, and a picture posted May 5, 2020, that went viral on Facebook. Here’s what it said in part:
 "If you are wearing the same set of gloves all over town you are only spreading germs everywhere you go. Every door you touch, the cart, the supplies, your phone, your car door, your face, money and change. … DON’T WEAR THE SAME GLOVES EVERYWHERE!"
 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 It seemed a good time to settle this question. Does wearing gloves really hurt more than it helps?
 Most likely, yes. Here’s what the experts have to say.
 CDC says no
 The glove guidance for the general public is simple from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Don’t.
 "CDC doesn’t recommend the general public use gloves. Gloves can be a source of contamination, even for the wearer, if not properly removed," spokeswoman Kate Grusich said in an email. "COVID-19 spreads through respiratory droplets that can land on surfaces. If the wearer touches a variety of surfaces during the day while wearing the same pair of gloves, contamination can definitely be transmitted from one surface to another."
 The CDC’s online guide for glove use recommends wearing them when cleaning or caring for someone who is sick. It expressly notes gloves are a bad choice for running errands.
 "The best way to protect yourself from germs when running errands and after going out is to regularly wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol," the website says.
 Why gloves are a bad idea
 But we don’t even have to take the CDC’s word for it. Infectious disease experts across the country agree gloves are a bad idea for general use.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 People may assume gloves are a solution on their own without recognizing that in the medical field they’re only part of the process. Gloves are disposed of as soon as the medical personnel leave a contaminated area, and hands are washed before and after removing.
 "We’re seeing a lot of people out in public wearing gloves, which isn’t wrong so to say," said Dr. Patricia Dandache, an infectious disease specialist at the Cleveland Clinic said this in a online post by the organization. "But unfortunately, most people aren’t wearing or disposing of their gloves correctly, which defeats the whole purpose."
 And removing gloves is a tricky process. The CDC gives detailed guidance on it because even health care professionals struggle to do it in a way that avoids contamination.
 A 2019 study in the American Journal of Infection Control found 37% of health care workers using their normal glove removal technique contaminated themselves in the process.
 Even if gloves were removed correctly, they’re problematic because people often wear them to multiple places.
 "With or without gloves, if you touch one thing then touch something else, you’re potentially transmitting it (the virus) from one place to another," Dr. David Cutler, a family medicine physician at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif., told Healthline.
 And the gloves aren’t providing any additional protection from COVID-19, said Mary Beth Graham, medical director of infection prevention and control at Froedtert Hospital in Milwaukee.
 "For things like influenza, COVID, etc., these are things where hand hygiene is sufficient," she said. "The virus isn’t going to go in through the pores of your skin on your hand. It’s going to get into you if you’re touching commonly touched surfaces and then going in to touch your nose, your mouth, your eyes … before you do hand hygiene (washing)."
 All of which brings us to perhaps the largest danger of glove-wearing — the false sense of security.
 "Wearing gloves may make someone feel safe, but it will also make people very lax in regards to recognizing that the key part of even wearing gloves is hand hygiene," Graham said. "Gloves are nothing without hand hygiene."
 Our ruling
 A viral Facebook post warned against wearing gloves in public because keeping the same set on means "you are only spreading germs everywhere you go."
 Infectious disease experts around the country agree gloves largely do more harm than good.
 They don’t really protect the wearer since the coronavirus doesn’t seep in through the skin. And they don’t limit the disease spread since they are often worn too long or removed incorrectly.
 And perhaps most notably, wearing gloves can stop users from washing hands as often, which is the step that actually kills the coronavirus.
 We rate this claim True.
When President Trump announced a plan to suspend immigration to the United States, New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand tweeted the news with her own assessment of the decision:
 "Immigrants make up a majority of essential workers in places like New York City," the Democrat wrote April 21. "They're on the front lines of the battle against this pandemic. I stand with our immigrant communities now and always."
 With so much dependent on the group of people that have become known as "essential workers," we wanted to look closer at Gillibrand’s statement to see if the numbers support it.
 Immigrants make up a majority of essential workers in places like New York City—they're on the front lines of the battle against this pandemic. I stand with our immigrant communities now and always. https://t.co/3KvPLoztko— Kirsten Gillibrand (@SenGillibrand) April 21, 2020 
 We found that while the statistics on this question are a little murky, one credible study does reinforce her assertion.
 What is an essential worker?
 Gillibrand’s communication’s director, Evan Lukaske, told PolitiFact that the senator was defining essential worker based on the way the New York City comptroller's office defined "frontline workers" in its March 26 report, "New York City’s Frontline Workers."
 The comptroller’s report defined New York City’s COVID-19 "frontline workers" as grocery, convenience, and drug store workers; public transit workers; trucking, warehouse, and U.S. Postal Service workers; health care workers; child care, homeless, food, and family services workers; and cleaning service workers.
 On March 20, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, and the New York State Department of Economic Development issued a guidance on the term "essential worker," and it listed several categories of worker who would not be covered under the categories used in the comptroller’s report, including those working at airports, certain types of manufacturing enterprises, hardware stores, funeral homes, animal shelters, and banks.
 Notably, the comptroller report’s "frontline worker" category includes only "direct-service, mostly non-governmental employees," meaning that it doesn’t count most types of public employees. As a result, the report does not take into account police officers, firefighters, and other first responders.
 So while Lukaske said that Gillibrand "is using ‘frontline’ and ‘essential’ as synonymous, there is a discrepancy between the two terms, and an alternate definition could end up changing the demographic profile.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That said, the comptroller’s report provides one reasonable definition. So what does the report’s analysis show?
 Looking at the data
 According to the comptroller’s study, more than 53% of frontline workers are foreign-born, meaning they’re immigrants. Of the sectors studied, building cleaning services employs the highest share of immigrants at 70%. It is followed by health care and food and drug store workers, both at 53%.
 
 
 Other studies have backed up the broader proposition that immigrants make up a significant portion of essential workers.
 The Center for Migration Studies of New York, a think tank on international migration, has estimated that 1.8 million immigrants in New York state work in jobs the state considers "essential businesses." The think tank found that foreign-born workers make up 31.5% of workers in essential businesses in New York state, despite only representing 28% of the state’s overall labor force. (It is logical that New York City’s percentage would be higher, since immigrants represent a higher share of the population in the city than in the rest of the state.)
 Nationally, immigrants make up a "sizable" share of essential workers in the fight against the pandemic, said Michelle Mittelstadt, director of communications for the Migration Policy Institute.
 The group estimates that 6 million immigrants are working frontline jobs in health care, food production, and transportation, and another 6 million immigrants work in industries such as food services and domestic household services.
 "You can assume that an immigrant-rich area like New York City might have higher shares of immigrants than the U.S. average in particular occupations," she said.
 Meanwhile, U.S. Census Bureau data shows that immigrants represent about 45% of the total workforce in New York City. That’s in line with Gillibrand’s assertion, said Jeffrey Passel, a senior demographer with the Pew Research Center.
 Our Ruling
 Gillibrand said that "immigrants make up a majority of essential workers in places like New York City."
 This number is backed up by a New York City comptroller’s office study that found that 53% of all "frontline" workers in the city are immigrants. However, the comptroller office’s definition, which doesn’t include government workers such as first responders and which differs from the state’s definition of "essential workers," is only one way of analyzing the data, and other methods might produce a lower percentage.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
Editor's note: This story has been updated to clarify the development of this type of fabric dates back to 2005, when it was patented by Jeffry Skiba and Lawrence Schneider.
 There’s reason to be skeptical of any Internet post claiming something kills the coronavirus.
 Facebook in particular can be a deluge of home remedies that range from unproven to downright dangerous.
 So you’d be forgiven for raising your eyebrows if you came across a May 21, 2020, Indianapolis Monthly article shared widely on Facebook saying researchers have found a "fabric that kills coronaviruses."
 But this claim has science behind it — preliminary though it may be. Researchers discovered low-level electric fields can render the coronavirus unable to infect a host after just a minute of exposure to the field.
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook).
 Here’s what we know so far about this product.
 Based on an FDA-approved concept
 Though the application to the novel coronavirus is new, the technology isn’t.
 The concept — called electroceutical fabric — was developed more than a decade ago, patented in 2005 by Jeffry Skiba and Lawrence Schneider. Itis approved by the FDA as a wound dressing and sold by Vomaris under the name Procellera.
 Chandan Sen, now the director of the Indiana Center for Regenerative Medicine and Engineering at the Indiana University School of Medicine, conducted a study in 2017 demonstrating the fabric's effectiveness as an antimicrobial wound dressing. And now he is applying the technology to combat COVID-19, with encouraging early results.
 When the coronavirus pandemic began, Sen thought about ways his research could help, he said in a YouTube video released through Indiana University.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "We tried to put some time into understanding the physical make of this virus, and are there perhaps some weak points we could target," Sen said.
 Sen detailed the potential application to COVID-19 on May 14, 2020, in a preliminary study released online at the preprint server ChemRxiv. The site publishes early versions of studies ahead of formal peer review and publication.
 Coronaviruses in general rely on electrostatic interactions to assemble themselves into an infective form and attach to a host.
 The electroceutical fabric consists of polyester printed with a series of metal dots — alternating silver and zinc — printed on the fabric in a geometric pattern. There is no wire or external battery, but these metals when exposed to moisture create microcell batteries that generate an electrical charge.
 "We thought then our dressing (could be) capable of disrupting those electrostatic forces, and we started testing it and the results have seemed very promising," Sen said in the video. "You’re using a very weak electric field which is not harmful to humans … but is capable of dismantling bacterial infections, we are currently working on fungal infection, and now we see it can also incapacitate, if you will, viruses."
 
 
 
 
 
 Vomaris has applied through the FDA's Emergency Use Authorization program to use the fabric for COVID-19 face masks.
 The Indianapolis Star reported May 26, 2020, the company is hoping to use the fabric to develop two products: A washable mask with a disposable electroceutical fabric layer can be inserted, and another mask designed for one-time use. The company hopes to have the products on the market by the fall flu season.
 "Use of personal protective equipment (PPE) is essential to safeguard healthcare providers against COVID-19," Sen’s study says. "However, use of these PPE itself poses significant threat as doffing of contaminated PPE carrying viable viral particles is likely to infect the person and potentially spread infection."
 Our ruling
 An article spread widely on Facebook says researchers have discovered a "fabric that kills coronaviruses"
 This particular application has not yet been peer-reviewed or approved by the FDA, but initial research shows electroceutical fabric is indeed able to neutralize the virus after a minute of contact with the electrical field generated by the fabric.
 The company that already manufacturers this product for use as a wound dressing hopes to have it ready for release later this year in antiviral face masks.
 So the signs are good, but given these findings are preliminary and haven’t yet been subject to peer review, we rate this Mostly True.
New York City has been hit especially hard by coronavirus, and the city’s homeless population in particular has struggled to comply with social distancing practices that public health officials have urged to contain the pandemic.
 In an urgent letter to Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo on April 3, 2020, a group of service and advocacy groups pressed for action. 
 The letter, spearheaded by the New York City-based Coalition for the Homeless, said that only 16.8% of New York City hotel rooms were occupied at the time, leaving more than 100,000 rooms empty. Yet at the same time, the groups said, more than 3,588 people were living on the streets and over 19,000 were living in shelters. 
 Five days later, Giselle Routhier, the policy director for the Coalition for the Homeless, told the New York Daily News, "We could open up tens of thousands of hotel rooms and offer every single person on the subway access to them. The mayor has absolutely to this point refused to do that."
 Is this accurate? Yes, though the assertion needs some additional context. (The mayor’s office did not respond to inquiries for this article.)
 Is it within de Blasio’s power to secure hotel rooms?
 There is longstanding precedent for the city paying hotels to provide emergency housing for New York City residents. In 2018, for instance, the city spent $364 million on annual contracts for emergency housing in hotels for homeless New Yorkers. 
 The challenge is the expense of paying for these hotel rooms.
 "The city has routinely used hotels as ‘emergency’ housing, but the cost has been exorbitant, ranging from $170 to $250 per night for one dwelling unit," Roderick M. Hills Jr., a New York University law professor, told PolitiFact.
 On April 23, Erin Drinkwater, the city’s deputy commissioner of the Department of Social Services, testified that prior to the coronavirus pandemic, the department paid $17 million per month to rent approximately 3,500 double-occupancy hotel rooms for homeless single adults. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Under proposed legislation requiring single-occupancy rooms, that cost would increase to $28 million per month, due to the cost of additional hotel rooms as well as security and operational needs, Drinkwater testified. 
 In her testimony, Drinkwater said that in addition to the 3,500 individuals already living in hotels, the city planned to move another 2,500 individuals — including people over 70, those with underlying health conditions, and those staying in the 10 most densely populated city shelters — to hotels by the end of April. 
 How many homeless New Yorkers would require hotels?
 The Coalition for the Homeless told PolitiFact that Routhier’s reference to tens of thousands of hotel rooms was not the number simply to house "every single person on the subway," but rather the entire homeless population throughout the city, which is estimated to exceed 22,000. The group did not provide a specific number of homeless New Yorkers living in the subway system.
 "The coalition has called for (hotels) to be used not only for homeless New Yorkers sheltering in the subway system, but also the many thousands more in congregate homeless shelters where social isolation is impossible and where Covid-19 is spreading," said Dan Levitan, a spokesman for the coalition. 
 A complication is that some hotel rooms have been converted for hospital use. The city said it planned to convert 250 hotel rooms in five hotels into hospital facilities, the Daily News reported on March 19. 
 Our ruling
 Routhier said, "We could open up tens of thousands of hotel rooms and offer every single person on the subway access to them. The mayor has absolutely to this point refused to do that." 
 The city already does contract with hotels to house New Yorkers facing emergency homelessness, and the number of homeless individuals the city has moved into hotels has increased since the onset of the pandemic. 
 However, the number of rooms being used for this purpose is well short of the "tens of thousands" of rooms needed to house all of New York City’s homeless population. The main reason is the high cost.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis is pushing back against vaccine mandates, particularly for people who already have been infected.
 During a stop in Gainesville, DeSantis accused city officials of threatening to "destroy" the jobs of city workers. The Gainesville City Commission has given employees until Oct. 31 to get fully vaccinated. At an Aug. 5 meeting, the city attorney seemed to take a hard line, saying "You have a choice. If you don’t want to get vaccinated, then your choice is to seek employment elsewhere."
 DeSantis said mandates ignore the natural immunity many first responders gained from getting the disease earlier in the pandemic.
 "The ones that have recovered have very strong immunity," DeSantis said Sept. 13. "That’s very clear from every study that’s been done."
 At a Tampa event later the same day, DeSantis mentioned a study out of Israel.
 "They compared the protection from a previous infection versus the Pfizer protection. They found that Pfizer did provide protection, but the natural immunity was far stronger," he said.
 We looked into the studies on natural versus vaccine-driven immunity, and natural immunity delivers a lot of protection. But researchers also see some signs that the best protection comes from a 1-2 punch of natural immunity plus one dose of vaccine.
 Importantly, natural immunity comes at a much higher personal risk than vaccination, and verifying natural immunity is more technically complex than verifying vaccination status.
 Comparing natural versus vaccine immunity
 Israeli researchers looked at thousands of medical records. In one part of the study, they compared over 16,000 patients who were previously infected and never vaccinated against another 16,000 who had only received the Pfizer vaccine. They factored in age, gender, health and when they were infected or vaccinated.
 They found that the vaccinated group that did not report any prior infection was much more at risk of catching COVID-19 later on than those who had already been infected but not vaccinated. There was a 13-fold higher risk of a breakthrough infection compared with reinfection.
 "This study demonstrated that natural immunity confers longer-lasting and stronger protection against infection," the Aug. 25 study said.
 They noted that the period they examined included the time when the delta variant was dominant in Israel. This study was released immediately, and still needs to be peer reviewed. Several factors might have shaped the results. Researchers might have missed a number of asymptomatic infections because those people would have less reason to be tested. And there was no control for social distancing and mask wearing habits that would affect the risk of infection.
 New work out of Rockefeller University adds weight to the Israeli findings. It focuses on the body’s molecular level defenses against the virus, especially the memory B cell. Long after the initial antibody response fades, these cells hold on to the blueprint of the virus and when they see it in the body months later, they crank up the antibodies to crush it.
 Both vaccinations and natural exposure build memory B cells. But the Rockefeller team found that the memory B cells produced through natural infection are more robust. They continue to evolve over the months, while the vaccination-driven memory B cells stopped changing after about two months. When facing variants, the naturally occurring memory B cells delivered better protection.
 The research is preliminary and future work might change the picture. But for now, there’s reasonable evidence that someone who recovered from the virus has protection that’s at least as good as that from a vaccine.
 The benefits of natural plus vaccine immunity
 What DeSantis didn’t mention is that the people who recover and then get vaccinated seem to get higher protection against the virus.
 In the Israel study, the effect was modest, but visible.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Individuals who were both previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 and given a single dose of the vaccine gained additional protection against the delta variant," researchers wrote.
 An August CDC study of Kentucky patients who were infected by COVID-19 in 2020 found that by mid-2021, the ones who never got vaccinated were more than twice as likely to get reinfected.
 However, the CDC researchers noted, vaccinated people might be less likely to get tested, which would drive down the reported reinfection numbers.
 A study published in April 2021 from a team at Oregon Health and Science University found that vaccinations boosted the antibody response against virus variants among people with natural immunity. Another study based on a small number of health care workers in Maryland reached a similar conclusion, saying those who had been previously infected benefited from a single dose of either the Moderna or Pfizer vaccines.
 On the downside, a British study published in the Lancet reported that people who were vaccinated after they had been infected were more likely to report side effects such as headache or fever than those who hadn’t been infected before. There were nearly no reports of side effects after one week.
 We lack a clear picture on the variation among people in the strength of natural immunity, and how long it lasts, especially as variants emerge.
 As is always true with COVID-19, the research is ongoing and the findings we see today might be supplanted by new work.
 Public health concerns
 DeSantis’ overall stance on vaccinations has become less clear over time. When the vaccines first arrived, he promoted them heavily, especially for the elderly. Now, he has pushed back against the mandates coming from the White House, saying Washington lacks the legal authority. At his event in Gainesville, he stood silent as city workers came to the podium and spread clear falsehoods about the safety of the vaccines. One man said the vaccines change a person’s RNA.
 DeSantis press secretary Christina Pushaw told the Tampa Bay Times that the governor supports vaccines.
 "Getting vaccinated is a smart choice to protect yourself from severe COVID outcomes," Pushaw told PolitiFact.
 But doctors worry the focus on natural immunity dilutes the pro-vaccine message.
 The lead author of the Rockefeller research underscored that relying on natural immunity is a high-risk strategy.
 "While a natural infection may induce maturation of antibodies with broader activity than a vaccine does, a natural infection can also kill you," said immunology center director Michel Nussenzweig in an August university article. 
 Dr. Matthew Laurens of the University of Maryland’s Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health echoed that point.
 "Vaccination is the best prevention," Laurens told PolitiFact Aug. 31. "This has been clearly shown in multiple prospective, randomized, double-blinded clinical trials, which are the very highest quality for clinical studies."
 Our ruling
 DeSantis said people who have recovered from COVID-19 have very strong protection.
 The studies are preliminary, but they do find that surviving COVID-19 leaves people with robust immunity, even stronger than immunity gained through vaccination.
 However, some of the same research found that giving a single vaccine dose to those who had recovered provided the best protection.
 DeSantis’ point is accurate but needs more context. We rate this claim Mostly True.
While cheering President Donald Trump’s ideas for "opening up America" amid COVID-19, the Rev. Franklin Graham suggested on Facebook that Trump’s "enemies and the liberal media" want a prolonged national shutdown in order to prevent Trump from being re-elected.
 The Christian minister and son of Billy Graham, the late evangelist, also made a claim about Sweden and its contrarian approach to combating the coronavirus. "I read yesterday that Sweden had not shut down, but their people were following social distancing and other protocols with the government stressing personal responsibility, and their infection rate still remains lower than the UK’s, Italy’s and Spain’s," Graham wrote in an April 17 post on Facebook. 
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) After PolitiFact published a rating on this statement April 24, Graham edited his original Facebook post to remove reference to the infection rate.
 
 Data support Graham’s claim about infection rates. But the epidemiologist credited with developing Sweden’s COVID-19 strategy said infection rate is not a reliable indicator of how a country is doing. 
 Sweden goes voluntary, not mandatory
 Sweden has a population of 10 million people, nearly nine out of 10 of whom live in urban areas; about 20% of residents were born abroad.
 In contrast to most of the United States, Sweden has imposed no lockdown and no quarantines, although groups of larger than 50 people are banned. With elementary schools, bars, restaurants and businesses still open, though with social distancing and other safety measures encouraged, what’s happening in Sweden seems like something closer to life as most Americans remember it.
 The idea in Sweden is to essentially pursue herd immunity — let the virus spread as slowly as possible while sheltering the elderly and the vulnerable until much of the population becomes naturally immune or a vaccine becomes available.
 The infection rates
 We didn’t get replies when we asked for information from two North Carolina-based organizations led by Graham, the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association and the international relief organization Samaritan's Purse.
 We found infection-rate figures from Our World in Data. That research organization is funded by philanthropists Bill and Melinda Gates and is led by Max Roser, who is director of the Oxford Martin Programme on Global Development at the University of Oxford. 
 Here are the total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases per 1 million people as of April 17, the day of Graham’s post:
 Spain: 3,910.1
 Italy: 2,794.18
 United States: 2,028.17
 United Kingdom: 1,518.62
 Sweden: 1,241.67
 So, Sweden’s known rate of infections is lower than the other countries Graham mentioned (and lower than the U.S. rate, as well). 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 10, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Italy drastically reduced the country’s official COV1D-19 death count by over 97%. This means Covid killed fewer people than an average seasonal flu.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’ll note that Our World in Data figures for April 17 show that the death rate — the ratio of confirmed deaths to confirmed cases — in Sweden was slightly higher than Spain’s, though lower than the other countries Graham cites. 
 United Kingdom: 13.32%
 Italy: 13.12%
 Sweden: 10.63%
 Spain: 10.46%
 United States: 4.96%
 Sweden’s death rate was much higher, however, than the three countries that border it: Denmark: 4.67%; Finland: 2.23%; Norway: 2%.
 Use caution on infection rates
 Experts urge caution on reading too much into the infection-rate figures that Graham alludes to.
 Testing has been focused on health care workers and people whose cases who are serious enough to end up in the hospital, so we don’t know the number of people infected who suffer mild or no symptoms, wrote Paul Franks, a genetic epidemiology professor at Lund University in Sweden and an adjunct professor at Harvard’s Chan School of Public Health.
 "The existing data suggest that the infection rates are probably much higher in Stockholm than in London and a little higher across Sweden than across the UK," he told PolitiFact.
 Indeed, Anders Tegnell, the epidemiologist who is credited with developing Sweden’s COVID-19 strategy, says infection rate is not a good measure of how a country is doing.
 "The recorded infection rate depends hugely on the number of tests performed and what indications for testing that are used," Tegnell, the director of the Swedish Public Health Agency, told PolitiFact. "In other words, an unreliable measure."
 Asked if Sweden’s strategy has been effective, Tegnell told us: "Partly, to the extent that the health system managed the challenge and that there are always free beds. Not so well in protecting the elderly."
 A surge in Sweden
 As we were preparing this fact-check, there were reports that confirmed infections in Sweden were rising sharply. For example, according to The Guardian, Sweden reported 812 new confirmed cases of coronavirus on April 24, the highest number of new cases in the country yet reported.
 At the same time, if Swedish studies are accurate, infections and deaths in Stockholm, where more than half of the country’s COVID-19 deaths have occurred, should "drop substantially in the coming weeks," Franks wrote on April 23. 
 Our ruling
 Urging that the reopening of the United States not be delayed, Graham said the COVID-19 infection rate in Sweden, which has no forced lockdown, is lower than in Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom.
 Infection rates are lower, but that’s not necessarily a telling metric. Experts, including the epidemiologist credited with devising Sweden’s no-lockdown strategy, said there are other reasons, including a lack of testing, not to read too much into infection rates as a measure of how well a country is responding to the virus. Sweden’s death rates, for example, are higher than some of its peers. 
 For a statement that is partially accurate but leaves out important information, our rating is Half True.
 UPDATE, April 27, 2020: This story has been updated to reflect that Graham edited his original April 17 Facebook post to remove reference to Sweden's COVID-19 infection rate following the April 24 publication of this fact-check.
To encourage people to get vaccinated against COVID-19, Rep. Pramila Jayapal, D-Wash., posted a comparison between the cost of a hospital stay and the vaccine.
 "The average hospital stay for a case of COVID-19 costs about $17,064. The vaccine is free," said Jayapal in her Aug. 30 Instagram post.
  
 It’s true that all three COVID-19 vaccines available in the U.S. are free to recipients. We wanted to know if Jayapal was correct about the average cost for a hospital stay for COVID-19 patients.
 Health policy and industry experts said the $17,064 figure sounds about right, based on available data. But they also noted that figuring out an "average" cost for a hospital stay is tricky due to varying factors among patients.
 The cost of COVID-19 care can vary widely depending on someone’s age, location, length of stay at the hospital, the hospital where they receive care, severity of illness and comorbidities. Whether someone has no insurance, commercial health insurance, Medicaid or Medicare also plays a role.
 "Pinning down an average is hard because for everyone who ended up on a ventilator for weeks, costing millions, there are also people who are in and out of (the) hospital in a day or two once they stabilize," said Niall Brennan, president and CEO of the Health Care Cost Institute, a nonprofit that compiles claims data and offers research on health care costs and utilization.
 Jayapal’s evidence
 As backup for Jayapal’s claim, her office sent us an Aug. 26 report from ABC Action News in Tampa. The report said, "No set amount has been found to be a solid average cost. But the numbers hover between $15-25,000 or more."
 The news station cited FAIR Health, a nonprofit focused on health costs and health insurance transparency, as a source. FAIR Health analyzed national data from January to May 2020, near the start and first peak of the pandemic, to assess the costs of hospitalization for a COVID-19 patient.
 FAIR Health highlighted the median — the middle point — for two different measures of cost:
 
 
 the charge amount, which is the amount charged to a patient who is uninsured or obtaining an out-of-network service;
 
 
 and the allowed amount, which is the total fee negotiated between an insurance plan and a provider for an in-network service. The allowed amount includes both the insurer’s and the member’s share of the total fee.
 
 
 The median charge amount for a COVID-19 hospitalization ranged from $34,662 for patients ages 23 to 30, to $45,683 for people ages 51 to 60, according to FAIR Health.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The median estimated allowed amounts ranged from $17,094 for people over 70 to $24,012 for people ages 51 to 60.
 Jayapal used the lowest number as an example of the cost of a hospitalization due to COVID-19, her spokesperson said.
 What other sources show
 The FAIR Health estimates for the median hospitalization cost are in line with what we found from other sources.
 An Aug. 20 brief about unvaccinated COVID-19 hospitalizations from the Peterson Center on Healthcare and Kaiser Family Foundation said various sources suggest an average hospitalization cost of around $20,000.
 The brief pointed to estimates from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which said that the average Medicare fee-for-service COVID-19 hospitalization cost was $24,033. (CMS said its data was preliminary.)
 The Peterson-KFF report said that another study of Medicare fee-for-service enrollees pegged the average cost at $21,752. According to that study, the mean cost was higher if the patient died in the hospital ($32,015) and was highest if the patient needed ventilator support ($49,441). Researchers also said there were racial and ethnic disparities in costs related to COVID-19.
 "Racial and ethnic minority patients incurred higher medical costs than non-Hispanic white patients, and non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic patients accounted for disproportionately high numbers of hospitalizations requiring ventilator support and inpatient deaths," the study said.
 The American Hospital Association referred us to the Peterson-KFF August brief. "It’s important to note that these reflect averages, and that there is significant variation — for example, some hospitalizations were as much as $80,000 for patients who had prolonged (intensive care unit) stays," said Thomas Jordan, a spokesperson for the trade group.
 Exactly how much a person will end up paying out-of-pocket for a hospitalization also depends on multiple factors. For those with health insurance, that can depend on the type of plan they have.
 Early in the pandemic, commercial insurers waived cost sharing for COVID-19 treatment, so those individuals might not pay any of the cost, said Ellen Meara, a professor of health economics and policy at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. However, people with high deductibles in their private insurance plan, and Medicare-insured individuals can face high out-of-pocket costs — often in the thousands of dollars — due to cost sharing, she said.
 Delta Air Lines CEO Ed Bastian said that unvaccinated employees enrolled in Delta’s account-based healthcare plan will be subject to a $200 monthly surcharge beginning Nov. 1, "to address the financial risk the decision to not vaccinate is creating for our company." He said that the average employee’s hospital stay for COVID-19 has cost Delta $50,000 per person.
 Our ruling
 Jayapal said, "The average hospital stay for a case of COVID-19 costs about $17,064. The vaccine is free."
 It’s difficult to determine an average cost for a hospital stay for COVID-19. Many individual factors can cause estimates to swing widely.
 But Jayapal’s figure is in line with several credible estimates, and to her bigger point, the vaccine is much cheaper.
 We rate her statement Mostly True.
Last week, U.S. Rep. Brian Fitzpatrick spoke about the coronavirus pandemic on a local talk radio show, and he told the host that the outbreak in this country looks more like the one in South Korea than the one in Italy.
 "We’ve got to give the American public a rough estimate of how long we think this is going to take, based mostly on the South Korean model, which seems to be the trajectory that we are on, thankfully, and not the Italian model," the Republican congressman from Bucks County said on The Dom Giordano Program.
 We wondered how the spread of the coronavirus in the United States compares with the spread of the disease in other parts of the world.
 When Fitzpatrick made those remarks, he was comparing the three countries’ case fatality rates, said Will Kiley, his spokesperson. That’s "the key metric we’re all watching," he added.
 Fitzpatrick is right that the fatality rate in the United States roughly matches South Korea’s and is far lower than Italy’s. But Drexel epidemiologist Michael LeVasseur cautioned against reading too much into those numbers.
 The virus appears to be deadlier in Italy because the population there is older, and elderly coronavirus patients are the most likely to die. For example, 23% of people in Italy are over age 65, compared with only 14% in South Korea and 16% in the U.S.
 The age-specific case fatality rates in the three countries are about the same, LeVasseur said.
 He also pointed out that the curve epidemiologists keep talking about depicts the number of coronavirus patients and hospitals’ capacity to care for them — not deaths caused by the virus. "Flattening the curve" means slowing the virus’ rate of transmission and reducing the number of new cases so that fewer sick people need to seek treatment all at once.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The latest data on coronavirus cases show that South Korea did flatten the curve, while case counts in the United States and Italy keep climbing.
 Another way to compare the virus’ impact in the three countries is to look at their economies.
 Fitzpatrick’s comments came amid a discussion with Giordano about the economic pain the virus has already inflicted on Pennsylvania business owners, and how much longer the closures ordered by Gov. Tom Wolf might last. The congressman argued that businesses need to know when things will go back to normal if they have any hope of surviving this crisis.
 In South Korea, businesses have remained open even as the country fights the virus, whereas in Italy, businesses have been closed for weeks.
 The latest modeling suggests the outbreak will peak in the United States in two weeks. But that doesn’t mean that Pennsylvania businesses should necessarily expect to reopen by May, said Nate Wardel, a spokesperson for the State Department of Health. The scarcity of coronavirus tests and the time it takes to get results remain the biggest hurdles to relaxing restrictions.
 Asked whether Wolf would use the state’s case fatality rate to determine when businesses may reopen, Wardle said it would be one of several metrics used to make that call. And no, he said, the similarity between the fatality rate in the United States and South Korea doesn’t mean Pennsylvania is ready for South Korea-style normalcy.
 Our ruling
 Fitzpatrick said the spread of the coronavirus in the United States matches the spread of the virus in South Korea, not Italy. The U.S. and South Korea have similar case fatality rates — Italy’s is higher — but all three countries have age-specific mortality rates that are about the same.
 In addition, public health experts say the fatality rate wouldn’t be the only or the most important metric used to determine when businesses may reopen.
 The growth in cases and hospitals’ capacity to treat new patients is the most important factor, and in that department, the United States looks more like Italy than South Korea. We rate this statement Half True.
Before announcing more stringent regulations Nov. 16, Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds made a statement in a Nov. 10 press conference about concerns that Test Iowa — the state’s COVID-19 testing program — was not conducting enough tests. This was the press conference where Reynolds announced a limited mandate requiring people to wear masks and social distance at certain gatherings.
 Reynolds said then Iowa can test up to 6,000 people per day with Test Iowa through the State Hygienics Lab, based in Iowa City, and listed other ways Iowans can receive a COVID-19 test:
 "So, just remember though that if you can’t get a test through Test Iowa, there are multiple other sites — your doctor, your clinics, your pharmacies, the stroke detection clinic centers. I mean, there are the antigen tests, you can buy a test at Costco. I mean, there are a lot of options out there and we’ll continue to build that out."
 Options exist, but how accessible are they? Here are some things to know.
 Unlike Test Iowa, which offers free COVID-19 tests to Iowans regardless if they have infection symptoms, other options Reynolds mentioned either require people wanting a test to be deemed eligible for one or cost money, sometimes both. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recommends reaching out to local health-care providers to get a test, according to its website. 
 The stroke detection clinic Reynolds referred to in her statement is Health Gauge, formerly called Stroke Detection Plus, Reynolds’ Communications Director Pat Garrett wrote in an email. The health and wellness business offers free COVID-19 testing to people at its Ames, Clive, and Urbandale locations in Iowa. People going to Health Gauge don’t have to meet conditions such as having symptoms or having been in contact with someone who tested positive for COVID-19 to receive a test but have to pay $100, according to Health Gauge’s website. 
 Costco shows a COVID-19 saliva testing kit for purchase on its website, available with or without video observation with a member of the Azova Patient Services Team, who manufactures the tests. Without the video option, the testing kit costs $129.99; the kit costs $139.99 with video observation. 
 In Iowa City, tests are available at University of Iowa Health Care and Mercy Iowa City once patients have been evaluated by a health-care provider.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Care providers at UI Health Care determine someone is eligible to receive a test if the person displays COVID-19 symptoms or has been in close contact with someone who has tested positive for COVID-19. UI Health Care Public Relations Manager Laura Shoemaker wrote in an email to The Daily Iowan that the test may cost money but is covered by most insurance providers. 
 Beyond health care clinics, pharmacies at stores such as Hy-Vee and Walgreens offer free COVID-19 tests by appointment. Both pharmacies require people to fill out an online survey to determine if they are eligible for tests, then have them pick a date and time. Both pharmacies state on their websites that they follow Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines as well as state and local guidelines to determine if someone should receive a test.
 There are 63 Hy-Vee pharmacy locations in Iowa offering tests, but also sites in neighboring Illinois, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. Walgreens lists five Iowa locations offering tests, in Cedar Rapids, Davenport, Des Moines, and Sioux City, and notes on its website that the plan is to expand testing capabilities to more locations in the coming weeks. 
 The state operates 26 Test Iowa sites and clinics, in Black Hawk, Buena Vista, Carroll, Cass, Crawford, Des Moines, Dickinson, Dubuque, Kossuth, Mitchell, Page, Linn, Polk, Plymouth, Pottawattamie, Scott, Sioux, Story, Union, Wapello, Winneshiek, and Wright counties. A Daily Iowanreview of each location on Tuesday, Nov. 17, showed time slots available Thursday, Nov. 19, at the earliest at every location, except those in Polk and Sioux counties. 
 On Nov. 12, two days after Reynolds made the statement, Test Iowa sites in Linn, Scott, Black Hawk, and Polk counties had no time slots available. 
 Test Iowa states on the program’s questionnaire to determine whether a person qualifies for a Test Iowa test that "over the next few days and weeks, additional testing sites in the state of Iowa will be set up." 
 The CDC states that people who should be tested include those with COVID-19 symptoms, who have been within 6 feet of someone who has tested positive for COVID-19 for more than 15 minutes, and for whom a health-care provider, state or local health department has recommended a test.
 Our ruling
 A quick check of the facts shows all of the areas Reynolds mentioned offer COVID-19 tests, though some are more accessible than others. Testing avenues such as Health Gauge and buying a test from places like Costco cost money, and organizations offering free testing might have qualifications to receive a test, and are not always in the most accessible locations for patients. We rate this statement as Mostly True.
When presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden appeared on the July 20 premiere of Joy Reid’s MSNBC show, "The ReidOut," he repeated an assertion about how he was more aware of the risks of the novel coronavirus early on than his opponent, President Donald Trump.
 Referring to Trump, Biden said, "I, all the way back in January, warned him this pandemic was coming. I talked about what we needed to do."
 Other news outlets have previously fact-checked similar assertions by Biden, but we’ll take a crack at his newest remark on Reid’s show.
 We found that Biden did warn about a potential pandemic as long ago as January, and talked about some steps the administration should take. A fuller, detailed plan came weeks later.
 The USA Today op-ed
 Biden’s primary warning about the coronavirus came in a USA Today op-ed he published on Jan. 27, which was six days after the first coronavirus case in the United States was announced. 
 Here are the op-ed’s key passages about the novel coronavirus:
 "The possibility of a pandemic is a challenge Donald Trump is unqualified to handle as president. … The outbreak of a new coronavirus, which has already infected more than 2,700 people and killed over 80 in China, will get worse before it gets better. Cases have been confirmed in a dozen countries, with at least five in the United States. There will likely be more. … To be blunt, I am concerned that the Trump administration’s shortsighted policies have left us unprepared for a dangerous epidemic that will come sooner or later."
 While Biden told Reid that he had "warned" Trump that "this pandemic was coming," his January op-ed did not word it so definitively. In the op-ed, Biden referred to "the possibility of a pandemic" and he said one "will come sooner or later."
 The World Health Organization did not declare a pandemic until March 11. Trump was tweeting as late as Feb. 24 that the coronavirus "is very much under control in the USA."
 Still, Biden’s wording in the Reid interview suggested that his warnings were more definitive than they were.
 His comment to Reid that he "talked about what we needed to do" as far back as January was more big picture than specific.
 Much of the op-ed set forth the ways in which the Obama administration, which Biden served as vice president, handled the 2014 Ebola virus outbreak, including marshaling a cooperative international response and relying on sound science for decision-making. Biden contrasted the Obama playbook with the ways that Trump, then a private citizen, "sought to stoke fear and stigma" about Ebola.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 International cooperation and a reliance on science are big-picture elements of fighting a disease outbreak in its early stages. Biden also wrote in the op-ed that, as president, he would "ask Congress to beef up the Public Health Emergency Fund and give me the power to use the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to declare a disaster if an infectious disease threat merits it. I will also renew funding — set to expire in May — for the nationwide network of hospitals that can isolate and treat people with infectious diseases, and fully fund the Global Health Security Agenda so the world is ready for the next outbreak."
 Beyond that, Biden did not offer much specificity for battling the coronavirus in January, when public-health officials around the world were just beginning to grasp the nature of the virus and the steps that would be required to contain it. 
 In the U.S., public-health officials were beginning to contemplate the potential need for extensive social-distancing measures in February and early March. Biden held an in-person rally in Detroit as late as March 9 before canceling a rally for the first time on March 10. The following day, the NBA abruptly suspended its season, triggering a cascade of cancellations of events and gatherings around the country.
 On March 12, Biden offered a more detailed plan. In remarks posted on Medium, Biden thanked those "who are already making sacrifices to protect us — whether that’s self-quarantining or cancelling events or closing campuses." 
 He went on to say that fighting the coronavirus "will mean making some radical changes to our personal behaviors: more frequent and more through handwashing and staying home from work if you are ill, but also altering some deeply ingrained habits, like handshakes and hugs, and avoiding large public gatherings."
 Biden also urged free testing for everyone who needs it; making sure communities have the hospital beds, staff, medical supplies and personal protective equipment needed to treat patients; efforts by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Defense Department to provide temporary hospitals; and fast-tracking of vaccine clinical trials by the National Institutes of Health and approvals by the Food and Drug Administration.
 Biden’s plan came four days before the White House issued recommendations that senior citizens and people with serious health concerns should stay home, initially for 15 days.
 The White House formally declared a national emergency on March 13.
 Biden’s campaign told PolitiFact that an op-ed was not the venue to flesh out a full plan; it was intended more as an outline.
 Our ruling
 Biden said, "I, all the way back in January, warned (President Trump that) this pandemic was coming. I talked about what we needed to do."
 Biden expressed concern about the coronavirus weeks before Trump did, and he recommended the Obama approach on Ebola, including international cooperation and the use of sound science, in January. He warned of the possibility of a pandemic several weeks before the WHO declared one, and predicted that there would be more cases in the U.S. 
 But while he spoke broadly in January about how the U.S. should approach the crisis, he did not offer a detailed plan until March 12, a day after the WHO declaration.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
Former Vice President Joe Biden has drawn mockery and criticism — primarily from conservatives — for verbal missteps throughout his presidential campaign.
 One recent Facebook post pulled out two statistical claims in particular, connected to gun violence and COVID-19.
 The July 13, 2020, post said with a laughing emoji: "America has around 300 million people. Joe Biden said 150 MILLION were lost to gun violence AND we just lost ANOTHER 120 million to covid-19. So I’m reaching out to my friends to see if ANY of you are still alive"
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook).
 This is obviously a joke, but it raises a question about Biden’s comments. Did he really claim both of those statistics at some point? 
 The botched stats
 Yes, Biden made these claims on two separate occasions, though for one he corrected himself immediately.
 Biden made the claim regarding the U.S. COVID-19 death toll on June 25, 2020, at a campaign event in Pennsylvania. He was talking about health care coverage with families.
 An ABC News Facebook Live video shows an attendee at the event mentioned the stress she felt over finances in addition to stress from hospital treatments, and how it all lowered her already low mental health at that time. Biden answered he intended to invest in mental health.
 "That’s why we have a major multibillion dollar investment in mental health," Biden said. "What people drastically underestimate is the impact on the mental health of people who now, everything is complicated. People don’t have a job. People don’t have anywhere to go. They don’t know what they’re going to do."
 He went on to say "Now we have over 120 million dead from COVID, I mean, 120,000 dead from COVID," according to audio obtained by Snopes.com.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biden made the gun violence claim in the final Democratic primary debate on Feb. 25, 2020, in South Carolina, where he said that 150 million Americans died since 2007 due to gun violence.
 "In addition to that, I passed the Brady Bill with waiting periods. I led that fight. But my friend on my right," Biden said, gesturing to U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, "and others have in fact also gave in to the gun manufacturers absolute immunity. Imagine if I stood here and said we give immunity to drug companies. We give immunity to tobacco companies. That has caused carnage on our streets; 150 million people have been killed since 2007 when Bernie voted to exempt gun manufacturers from liability. More than all the wars, including Vietnam, from that point on."
 So, the Facebook post is correct in that he made these claims, though it omits the date range Biden used and doesn’t give Biden credit for immediately correcting the COVID data error.
 The real numbers
 In both cases, Biden or his staff acknowledged he intended to say thousands, not millions. 
 As Biden noted a moment after referencing millions of COVID deaths the current death toll remains in the thousands. As of June 25, 2020 when he made this statement, the death toll was more than 119,000, according to the John Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center dashboard.
 On the gun violence claim, a member of Biden’s campaign said Biden meant to say 150,000 people. Biden has previously referenced that stat correctly.
 Data from the CDC shows from 2007 to 2018 there were 148,182 firearm homicides.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said Biden said 120 million Americans died from COVID-19 and that 150 million Americans died from gun violence since 2007. 
 Both of those numbers are drastically wrong. Biden meant to say "thousands" in both cases, not "millions."
 The post is correct that Biden did make these claims, but after misstating the COVID stat he immediately corrected himself, a detail the post omits.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
Susan Collins, viewed as among the most vulnerable U.S. senators up for reelection Nov. 3, says her opponent is guilty of hypocrisy in connection with the federal Payment Protection Program response to COVID-19.
 The Maine Repubican’s challenger is Democrat Sara Gideon.
 Gideon’s husband’s law firm "took up to $2 million" from the Paycheck Protection Program, a Collins ad claims, the same program she "falsely" attacked Collins over.
 "That’s hypocrisy," the narrator says after making the two-part claim in the ad.
 It’s similar to a Republican-on-Democrat attack we fact-checked in another key Senate race, in Arizona.
 In this case, the $2 million part is correct, but the "falsely attacked" part is not.
 Potentially pivotal race
 Collins has been a senator since 1997. Gideon has served in Maine’s state House since 2013 and as its speaker since 2016.
 Many news accounts say the race is one that could determine whether Republicans keep a majority in the Senate, where they now control 53 seats.
 With polls showing a tight contest — the Cook Political Report has rated the race a tossup — federal aid programs for businesses have become a focal point of attacks on both sides.
 How the PPP works
 Congress created the Paycheck Protection Program to help small businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic avoid layoffs. The program was established by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, signed into law in March by President Donald Trump.
 The law provides for up to $659 billion in loans for businesses so they can pay their employees and cover certain other expenses, such as rent and utilities. The loans are forgiven if businesses meet specified terms.
 While the federal government created and administers the program, banks, credit unions and other lending institutions handle the loan applications and disbursement of funds.
 Collins’ ad
 Collins’ ad launched on Facebook on Aug. 1. According to Facebook, it has been viewed 175,000 to 200,000 times.
 Wayne Parry, who is identified as a Maine lobsterman in the ad, appears in and narrates the 30-second piece. As has been reported, Parry also served four terms as Republican state representative, backed by campaign donations from a Collins political action committee, and is currently running for his old seat.
 The ad’s first claim is about a PPP loan of "up to $2 million" to the law firm of Gideon’s husband, personal-injury attorney Benjamin Gideon.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Berman & Simmons, a Lewiston law firm where Benjamin Gideon is a partner, received a PPP loan of between $1 million and $2 million, according to data from the Small Business Administration. The loan came from a Lewiston bank. The firm did not reply to our request for the exact amount of the loan it received.
 Gideon campaign spokeswoman Maeve Coyle said Benjamin Gideon is one of 11 partners at the firm and was not involved in seeking the PPP money. She said 43 of the firm’s 61 employees are not attorneys, and that nearly all Maine law firms took PPP loans because the pandemic closed courts.
 Most large Maine law firms sought PPP aid, the Associated Press reported.
 "Falsely attacks Collins"
 Collins’ ad says Gideon’s criticisms have included a false attack on Collins over the program. It cites a June 15 article by the Washington Post Fact Checker that called a Gideon attack ad "highly misleading." Still, there are some facts behind Gideon’s attack that are literally accurate, as new reporting from ProPublica shows. 
 The Gideon ad claimed: "As coronavirus spread, Susan Collins took $12,000 from the corporate hotel industry. Then Collins wrote a special loophole into her bill allowing large, out-of-state hotels to get millions — while only one in 10 Maine small businesses were getting the help they needed."
 We found that Collins collected a total of $12,500 in donations in February from hotel industry political actions. Her campaign committee received $2,500 from the International Franchise Association; $2,500 from Hilton Worldwide; and $2,500 from American Lodging and Hotel. And the American Lodging and Hotel PAC gave $5,000 to Collins’ leadership PAC.
 As for the timing, by mid-February, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had confirmed 15 coronavirus cases in the United States. Collins and other senators began drafting the PPP bill in early March, said her campaign spokesman, Kevin Kelley.
 Collins was a key drafter of the PPP, which targeted aid to businesses with 500 or fewer employees. She did respond to lobbying from the hotel industry.
 As reported Aug. 6 by ProPublica, a Pulitzer Prize-winning nonprofit newsroom, Collins’ office said it had been contacted during the drafting process by the International Franchise Association and the American Hotel and Lodging Association, among other business interests, and ultimately an exception was written in the legislation for restaurant and hotel chains. Collins took credit for the exception, which allowed those companies to apply with up to 500 employees per location, even if they were much bigger overall.
 At least 59 large hotel companies were approved for more than 600 forgivable government loans totaling up to $1 billion despite having more than 500 employees overall, according to ProPublica.
 In an opinion article she authored, Collins called ProPublica "a left-wing outlet that is financed by Democratic billionaires." She defended the exception, saying it made a franchise hotel owner eligible "as intended to help keep the business afloat and its workers employed," but that a large corporate chain such as Hilton "is prohibited from receiving a PPP loan for its corporate headquarters or any hotels that it owns and operates directly."
 On Gideon’s claim that at the time, only one in 10 small businesses in Maine got the forgivable PPP loans, the Bangor Daily News reported that statistic as of mid-April, saying 16,000 Maine small businesses had received aid. That was at a point when the first batch of PPP funds had been exhausted.
 Federal figures show that as of Aug. 8, more than 28,000 PPP loans were made in Maine. So, Gideon’s number was from initial reports that later increased. 
 Overall, we found Gideon’s attack on Collins to be a mixture of exaggeration and accuracy. 
 Our ruling
 Collins claimed that Gideon’s husband’s law firm "took up to $2 million" from the same federal program she "falsely" attacked Susan Collins over.
 The law firm where Gideon’s husband is a partner did take a loan through the federal Payment Protection Program program that could be as large as $2 million. With fewer than 500 employees, the firm qualifies as a small business under the program’s guidelines. But Gideon’s attack on Collins is largely accurate. 
 As Gideon claimed in an ad, after Collins received campaign contributions from the hotel industry, she wrote an exception in the PPP law that, according to a ProPublica investigation, enabled at least 59 large hotel companies to be approved for more than 600 forgivable government loans totaling up to $1 billion.
 We rate Collins’ statement Half True.
Gov. Roy Cooper says he wants North Carolina school boards to reopen in-person instruction on their own, rather than be forced by state lawmakers.
 Republican legislators recently introduced a bill that would require county school boards to offer the option of in-person classes. 
 When a reporter asked Cooper about it during a press conference on Tuesday, he said he hadn’t read the bill yet.
 "I haven’t seen the legislation, (but) I know about it," Cooper said. "I have some concerns with it, particularly stripping out some of the health protocols that are in place."
 Is it true that the GOP bill would "strip" some current safety protocols that are already in place?
 The bill would strip school boards of flexibility. (They would no longer be allowed to offer remote-only instruction, unless there’s a COVID outbreak.) However, the bill itself does not automatically strip schools of any health protocols for in-person learning. 
 The current situation
 In North Carolina, Cooper is giving public school boards some flexibility to choose how they want to reopen. He’s laid out three levels of operation:
 
 
 Plan A: minimal social distancing.
 
 
 Plan B: moderate social distancing.
 
 
 Plan C: full remote learning.
 
 
 (There are specific protocols to follow for each plan. For the sake of brevity, we won’t get into those details just yet.)
 So far, Cooper has given only elementary schools the ability to enact Plan A. Middle and high schools can only choose Plan B or Plan C. 
 The Republican bill would require all public schools to offer Plan A or Plan B, while allowing parents the ability to still choose a remote alternative.
 Cooper’s use of the word "strip" could give parents the impression the bill would change health protocols that are already in place. The bill does not aim to do that.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Following protocols
 The bill requires schools to follow protocols laid out in the "Strong Schools NC Public Health Toolkit" that was developed by the health department, led by Cooper-appointee Mandy Cohen, as well as the Department of Public Instruction.
 The original bill told school boards to follow toolkit guidance that "existed on December 4, 2020." On Wednesday, the Senate amended the bill to ensure schools follow the latest version of the toolkit, which was updated on Feb. 2. 
 Cooper said Tuesday that 90 out of North Carolina’s 115 school districts already provide some in-person instruction.
 Consider for a moment that your school district is already operating under a Plan B model of in-person learning. PolitiFact found no evidence that, if the bill were enacted, health protocols for Plan B would be significantly different from what they are now.
 Plan A vs. Plan B
 Of course, if the bill is enacted and school boards are able to choose Plan A, one could argue that would "strip" teachers of existing protections.
 Plan A and Plan B are similar in some ways. Both require schools to mandate face coverings, conduct regular screenings for coronavirus symptoms, limit visitors, mark the floors to guide movement, and more. (Page 5 of the toolkit features a chart showing how the plans track on 10 out of 11 key guidelines.)
 However, there are a few protocols required in Plan B that aren’t required under Plan A, including:
 
 
 Mandating 6 feet of physical distance,
 
 
 Banning more than one passenger per bus seat,
 
 
 Restricting carpooling to family members.
 
 
 To be clear, these differences are not insignificant. While in December experts found in-school coronavirus spread to be low, experts have also repeatedly confirmed that social distancing and spacing are key to limiting spread.
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention considers in-person learning with minimal social distancing to be the highest-risk learning model. On MSNBC this week, the CDC director reiterated that schools can open safely only if they continued social distancing.
 Our ruling
 Cooper said a Republican bill that would require counties to enact in-person learning is "stripping out some of the health protocols that are in place."
 He’s right that the bill would "strip" school boards of the ability to offer remote learning exclusively. Also, if the bill is enacted and local school boards opt for Plan A, one could argue that teachers would be stripped of their social distancing protection.
 However, a parent whose child attends a school operating under Plan B may hear Cooper’s comments and think the Republican bill would remove some health protocols that are already in place. That doesn’t appear to be the case.
 Bill sponsors say the intention is for schools to continue operating under the guidelines outlined by the Cooper administration. We rate his claim Half True.
The coronavirus response bill signed into law by President Donald Trump March 27 will send a total of about $300 billion to Americans in the form of direct payments. 
 Exactly how much money each person will get depends primarily on their income and the number of dependents claimed on their tax returns. It can be challenging to understand, but if you’re looking for clarity, don’t turn to social media posts as a primary source of information.
 One such post is leaving some parents worried: "If you’ve let somebody claim your kids for income tax purposes, you will not receive a stimulus check. The person who claimed your kids is gonna get it."
 The reality isn’t as simple as the March 31 post makes it sound. Regardless of who claimed your children as dependents, you should still be eligible for a direct payment as part of the $2 trillion COVID-19 response legislation, as long as you meet the income requirements. But determining who will get the $500 payment that is available for each qualifying dependent child is complicated.
 The payments
 The coronavirus response package will send most single, adult Americans one $1,200 direct payment.
 Individuals with Social Security numbers who reported an adjusted gross income of $75,000 or less on their 2019 tax returns will get the full $1,200 payment. Married couples filing jointly who earned less than $150,000 will receive $2,400. 
 But the payment decreases incrementally as income goes up. Individuals who made over $99,000 or married couples who earned more than $198,000 and have no dependent children will not receive a payment.
 Even people who might not normally file income tax returns — including some Social Security beneficiaries — are eligible for payments. 
 Anyone claimed as a dependent is ineligible to receive a $1,200 payment, even if they are an adult, according to reporting by several news outlets.
 Due to the coronavirus outbreak, the deadline for filing taxes on your 2019 income has been extended from April 15, 2020 to July 15, 2020. Keeping in mind that many people are still in the process of filing those returns, 2018 filings will apply in cases where the most recent filings are not available. 
 Claiming child dependents 
 If you claimed a child under age 17 as a dependent, your direct payment will increase by as much as $500 per qualifying child, subject to the income level restrictions.
 "Whoever claimed the child on the 2019 return — or the 2018 return if the 2019 return is not available — will be eligible for that $500 additional payment," said Elaine Maag, a tax policy expert and principal research associate at the Tax Policy Center.
 "Almost all children are claimed by parents," Maag said, but there are several legitimate situations in which others can claim children as dependents.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Caroline Bruckner, managing director of the Kogod Tax Policy Center at American University, said a typical example would be children being raised by relatives.
 "It’s not uncommon for a grandparent to claim a grandchild living with them, or for an older sibling to claim their younger siblings or even stepsiblings where the parents are absent or deceased," Bruckner said in an email.
 In these cases, the payment goes to the person who claimed that child as a dependent for 2019.
 But Maag said there is still a chance that parents who did not claim their children on their 2019 tax returns could get the $500 direct payment. 
 If the parent is claiming the child as a dependent for the 2020 tax year — even if the child was claimed by someone else in 2019 — the parent could be eligible for the $500 payment, according to Maag. In that case, she said, the person who claimed the dependent in 2019 would not have to return the money, and the individual claiming the dependents for 2020 would also get a payment. 
 The stimulus aid is considered an advance credit on tax reductions you would otherwise be seeing on your 2020 taxes. (You won’t have to pay them back.) So if taxpayers would qualify for dependent children payments based on their 2020 returns, the IRS will let them claim the payment.
 "There’s not a claw-back mechanism," Bruckner said. "Congress is looking to pump money out to taxpayers as quickly as possible to weather this crisis — and they are using information taxpayers provide on their returns to quickly figure out who is going to qualify and how to get it to them as quickly as possible."
 If you don’t claim your children in either 2019 or 2020, however, this does not mean you are ineligible for a stimulus check, as this Facebook post says. For most adults, you could still get up to a $1,200 direct payment as an individual or $2,400 as a married couple, subject to the income limits. 
 There are also age restrictions that apply to children 17 and older. Families with dependents who are at least 17 won’t be getting $500 per child payments, and those dependents won’t be getting the $1,200 check, either.
 Ruling
 A viral image reads, "If you’ve let somebody claim your kids for income tax purposes, you will not receive a stimulus check. The person who claimed your kids is gonna get it."
 The reality is more complicated.
 If you didn’t claim your child as a dependent, you’ll still get a direct payment as part of the federal coronavirus response package, as long as you don’t earn too much to qualify. 
 What you won’t receive is the additional $500 that goes to individuals and couples for each dependent child. Instead, that money will be given to the person who claimed the child as a dependent. But if you are claiming a child as a dependent for the 2020 tax year, you become eligible for a payment as well.
 The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate this image Half True.
While President Donald Trump has lauded increased testing for COVID-19, his rival Joe Biden said the administration has failed to deliver on its promises.
 "The Trump Administration promised 27 million tests by the end of March. As of now, only 4 million have been completed," Biden tweeted April 21.
 The Trump Administration promised 27 million tests by the end of March.
 
 As of now, only 4 million have been completed. It’s unacceptable.
 
 We can’t safely reopen the economy without scaling up testing, and we can’t effectively scale up testing unless Donald Trump does his job.— Joe Biden (@JoeBiden) April 22, 2020 
 Tests play a huge role in managing the COVID-19 crisis and planning for the recovery. Health experts say that the country needs a massive increase in testing before states can reopen businesses and schools, although some governors are already moving in that direction. The U.S. has lacked a national widespread testing program, a result of early missteps and a lack of capacity and supplies.
 Is the Trump administration really short on its March promise by 23 million tests? 
 We found that Biden’s tweet conflates the number of tests the Trump administration said would be on the market with the number of people who have been tested. About 4 million people in the U.S. have been tested as of April 21, according to Johns Hopkins University.
 What the Trump administration "promised" 
 The 27 million number comes from a White House briefing March 21. A reporter asked about the number of available tests.
 Brett Giroir, who is overseeing testing for the federal government, responded: "So, from March 2 to March 14, we have put over 10 million laboratory tests into the U.S. commercial market, and we expect that, by March 28, to be well over 27 million into the market. So that answers your question."
 But Giroir said that was the wrong question to ask because not every lab can run every test.
 "So, the more important question is not how many tests are in the market — we got them in the market — but it’s to make sure that every segment of the market has the kind of test that they can use," said Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
 Giroir’s figure of over 27 million referred to how many tests he said would be in the market — not how many people would be tested. 
 Earlier in the briefing, Vice President Mike Pence brought up the number of Americans tested, which he said was around 210,000. "The White House was clear that these were two separate numbers," Zack Parkinson, a spokesman for the Trump campaign, told PolitiFact.
 Parkinson said that Giroir didn’t make a "promise" on the 27 million tests. We will leave it up to readers to decide.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About one month later, Giroir was asked about the 27 million number at a White House briefing. The reporter’s question sounded a lot like what Biden later tweeted:
 "On March 24 — March 21, the administration promised 27 million tests by the end of March. So far, roughly 4 million people have been tested. So where are the other 23 million or so tests? Did they not materialize? Are they in the pipeline? Help us understand that discrepancy." 
 Giroir replied that he was referring to tests in the marketplace.
 "So if you want to use those metrics, there’s been over 40 million ‘in the marketplace.’ But we have an end-to-end issue that we needed to deal with, and that’s what we’ve been dealing with: the swabs, the transport media," Giroir said April 20.
 "We have some of our main platforms that are only 10% being utilized," he continued. "You could have a lot of tests in the market, and those are correct numbers, but if the machines aren’t utilizing them and they’re not organized at that level, then they’re not being utilized to its fullest."
 In other words, it takes more than simply having the test kit available to perform and process the tests.
 Trump has overstated the scope of U.S. testing multiple times. He said that people were being tested getting on and off airplanes and that anybody can get a test, statements we rated Pants on Fire.
 Trump has portrayed the tests as readily available, but several governors say that they aren’t getting enough swabs and reagents to administer large-scale testing. 
 And Trump has sometimes talked about millions of tests without specifying that he was referring to testing kits.
 "We have now a great system and it’s almost fully in gear, but it’s able to test millions of people," Trump said March 20. At the time, about 140,000 people had been tested, according to the COVID Tracking Project. 
 Our ruling
 Biden tweeted, "The Trump Administration promised 27 million tests by the end of March. As of now, only 4 million have been completed."
 Biden conflated two different metrics: the number of projected available tests in the market and the number of people in the U.S. actually tested. 
 On March 21, a Trump administration official said he expected well over 27 million tests in the marketplace by March 28. As of April 21, about 4 million people had been tested.
 The statement is partially accurate but omits critical context. We rate this statement Half True.
President Donald Trump’s answer to criticism of the U.S. coronavirus response is partly that Joe Biden wouldn’t do any better.
 Trump points, sometimes wrongly, to Obama-era history, when Joe Biden was the new vice president and the country was dealing with swine flu. 
 On Twitter, an account managed by Trump’s campaign went on the defensive with an attack on Biden’s handling of the H1N1 virus, just hours before Biden announced what he thought the Trump administration should be doing.
 That March 12 tweet from @TrumpWarRoom says: "Joe Biden will again politicize coronavirus today. But his record on pandemics is one of incompetence. During the 2009 swine flu outbreak, Biden made reckless comments unsupported by science & the experts. The Obama Admin had to clean up his mess & apologize for his ineptitude."
 Biden’s statement had to do with the way germs travel through an aircraft. We fact-checked his statement and rated it Pants on Fire back in 2009. 
 We decided to take a fresh look at the Trump team’s tweet in 2020.
 Joe Biden will again politicize coronavirus today. But his record on pandemics is one of incompetence.
 
 During the 2009 swine flu outbreak, Biden made reckless comments unsupported by science & the experts.
 
 The Obama Admin had to clean up his mess & apologize for his ineptitude. pic.twitter.com/5TCKZeShkz— Trump War Room - Text EMPOWER to 88022 (@TrumpWarRoom) March 12, 2020 
 What Biden said
 The swine flu epidemic, or H1N1, was detected in the U.S. in April 2009. The first cases were found in Mexico before rapidly spreading around the world. The U.S. declared a public health emergency on April 26, and President Barack Obama upped that to a national emergency in late October. 
 Biden went on the Today Show on April 30, 2009, to talk about the outbreak.
 Then-host Matt Lauer asked Biden, "If a member of your family came to you and said, 'Look, I want to go on a commercial airliner to Mexico and back,' within the next week, would you think it's a good idea?"
 Biden said he would tell them not to be in a confined place, and he gave his reason.
 "It's not that it's going to Mexico, it's you're in a confined aircraft," Biden said. "When one person sneezes it goes all the way through the aircraft."
 He said he would not suggest taking the subway, either. "If you're out in the middle of a field and someone sneezes, that's one thing; if you're in a closed aircraft or closed container or closed car or closed classroom, it's a different thing."
 Biden’s comment drew criticism over fear-mongering, particularly from the travel industry, and experts told us Biden got it wrong.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In our 2009 fact-check, we consulted Dr. Tony Overfelt from Auburn University’s National Air Transportation Center, which specializes in studying aircraft environment. At the time, Overfelt said that the air in a commercial jet flows from vents above passengers' heads to vents in the floor at their feet. That airflow sends particles down to the floor and into the aircraft's filtration system.
 The particles from a sneeze "might travel a row or a couple of rows or something like that," Overfelt said. "They're really not going to travel up and down the airplane as our vice president said." 
 How the administration responded
 The tweet said the Obama administration had to "clean up" Biden’s mess and "apologize for his ineptitude."
 There was cleanup, including a half-hearted apology if anyone was "unduly alarmed."
 A spokesperson for Biden’s office released a statement hours later to clarify what he said. They said Biden’s advice lined up with the administration’s: that people should avoid unnecessary air travel to and from Mexico. 
 "If they are sick, they should avoid airplanes and other confined public spaces, such as subways," the statement said. "This is the advice the vice president has given family members who are traveling by commercial airline this week."
 Biden’s presidential campaign declined to comment.
 As shown in the Trump Warm Room tweet, White House press secretary Robert Gibbs responded to Biden’s remark in the White House briefing.
 "I think what the vice president meant to say was the same thing that, again, many members have said in the last few days, and that is, if you feel sick, if you are exhibiting symptoms, flu-like symptoms — coughing, sneezing, runny nose — that you should take precautions, that you should limit your travel," Gibbs said on April 30.
 A reporter then says that wasn’t "remotely close" to what Biden said, to which Gibbs responded: 
 "I understand what he said and I'm telling you what he meant to say ... Obviously if anybody was unduly alarmed for whatever reason, we would apologize for that and I hope that my remarks and remarks of the people of the CDC and Secretary Napolitano have appropriately cleared up what he meant to say."
 Our ruling
 A Twitter account run by the Trump campaign tweeted that, during the 2009 swine flu outbreak, Biden made "reckless comments" unsupported by science and the Obama Administration had to clean up the mess and apologize for it. 
 During a television interview, Biden said he would advise his family not to travel in confined places, and claimed that when one person sneezes "it goes all the way through an aircraft."
 His comments were met with backlash for inducing fear, and his spokesperson issued a statement to clarify his words. Experts said the statement on how germs travel was inaccurate.
 The claim is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate it Mostly True.
The latest state of emergency declared by Gov. Tony Evers — his third since the start of the coronavirus pandemic — elicited the expected reaction from Republicans.
 The latest order extended the state’s mask mandate, which was set to expire Sept. 30, for an additional two months.
 An avalanche of GOP news releases and social media posts condemned Evers, a Democrat, calling the order "illegal," "unconstitutional," an "overreach" and a "power grab." Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, called it "rule by fiat" and said there would "undoubtedly be additional court challenges" — on top of the court challenges to previous orders.
 But one Wisconsin Democrat says Vos has no reason to wait on court challenges.
 "Whenever you see a WI Republican bemoan the Governor's mask mandate, remember these 2 things," state Sen. Chris Larson of Milwaukee said Sept. 23, 2020 on Twitter. "1) They have the power to overturn the order by joint resolution and they refuse to do it. 2) They sued to have control over our #COVID19 response months ago, and have done nothing."
 We’re focusing on the first point. It’s an overlooked element of the partisan showdown over Wisconsin’s coronavirus response.
 And Larson is exactly right. Republicans could end Evers’ order any time, if they got a majority vote in the chambers they control.
 Let’s review what's going on.
 The state of emergency statute
 State law first gave the governor authority to declare a state of emergency in 1951, though that was related only to acts of war. The circumstances in which an emergency may be declared and the governor’s powers in that scenario have evolved since, including the addition of public health emergencies in 2002.
 The only prior public health emergency in state history came in 2009, when Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle issued Executive Order #280 in response to H1N1 (swine flu), according to the Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The section of statute Evers relied on for his three orders isn’t a long one, so here’s the whole thing. We’ve bolded the key element at the end:
 Declaration by governor. The governor may issue an executive order declaring a state of emergency for the state or any portion of the state if he or she determines that an emergency resulting from a disaster or the imminent threat of a disaster exists. If the governor determines that a public health emergency exists, he or she may issue an executive order declaring a state of emergency related to public health for the state or any portion of the state and may designate the department of health services as the lead state agency to respond to that emergency. If the governor determines that the emergency is related to computer or telecommunication systems, he or she may designate the department of administration as the lead agency to respond to that emergency. A state of emergency shall not exceed 60 days, unless the state of emergency is extended by joint resolution of the legislature. A copy of the executive order shall be filed with the secretary of state. The executive order may be revoked at the discretion of either the governor by executive order or the legislature by joint resolution.
 So, revoking the order is a pretty straightforward process. And one way to do it is a joint resolution approved by both houses. What’s more, unlike traditional legislation it is not subject to the governor’s veto — a simple majority is enough.
 The status of the Legislature
 Republicans hold a commanding majority in both houses. The advantage is 18-13 in the Senate and 63-34 in the Assembly (with two vacant seats in each chamber).
 Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald said back in July that Senate Republicans had the votes and "stand ready" to overturn the first emergency declaration and mask mandate.
 That put the onus on Vos, who said in his Sept. 22, 2020, statement, "No one branch of government can rule outside the letter of the law and go unchecked, even during a pandemic." But Vos has not taken action to be that check.
 It’s unclear whether Assembly Republicans are fractured on the issue, or if other political considerations are at play — such as not wanting to put members on record with a vote in the midst of a volatile election year. A Vos spokeswoman did not respond to a request for comment.
 State Sen. Steve Nass, R-Whitewater, even issued a statement criticizing the inaction of Vos and others in his party, saying Vos "has enabled the continuing illegal conduct of Governor Evers in issuing repeated emergency declarations and a failed statewide mask mandate." 
 Our ruling
 Larson said in a tweet that the Republicans who control the Legislature "have the power to overturn the order by joint resolution and they refuse to do it."
 That’s correct. Republicans have the majority in both houses and the power under state statute. Whatever the reason, they have not acted to end the governor’s state of emergency and accompanying mask mandate.
 We rate this claim True.
Election officials across the United States are preparing for a surge of mail-in ballots this fall, as fears about voting in-person on Nov. 3 continue amid the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 But there are also fears about the mail-in voting process. Some are concerned, for example, that a crush of ballots dropped in the mail could result in delays in getting them to election offices and votes not being counted. 
 Several popular posts on Instagram, Facebook and Twitter suggest people should allow "at least 14 days roundtrip" to ensure they can request, fill-out and send back their ballots on time. 
 Some posts say the U.S. Postal Service recommends this two-week period. They also claim that Election Day is really Oct. 20, and not the official date, Nov. 3, for those who want to vote by mail. 
 Here are two examples:
 
 Do people really need to allow so much time for mail-in voting? 
 We set out on a fact check. 
 Our research
 All voters should check with their state and local election officials about mail-in voting deadlines. We found, however, that some states give far more time than others for ballots to be received, which chips away at the premise there’s a fixed deadline for all Americans who vote-by-mail. 
 In California, for example, election officials must accept mail-in ballots that arrive up to 17 days after Election Day, as long as they are postmarked by Nov. 3. That’s the result of a new law passed this year. 
 In North Carolina, ballots are accepted three days after Election Day, as long as they are postmarked by that day. In Georgia, Hawaii, Connecticut and many other states, there’s no extension: ballots must arrive by the time polls close on Nov. 3. 
 "The most common state deadline for election officials to receive absentee or mail ballots is on Election Day when the polls close," the National Conference of State Legislatures says on its website. "Some states, however, accept and count a mailed ballot if it is received after Election Day but postmarked prior to the election."
 Deadlines for all 50 states are listed on the NCSL website here. 
 Social Media Claim ‘Misses The Mark’
 Amber McReynolds, a national expert on election administration and Denver’s former elections director, said the social media posts present a blanket warning that might be accurate for some states, but wrong for others. 
 Registered voters in seven states — California, Oregon, Washington, Utah, Colorado and Vermont, plus Washington D.C. — don’t have to request a mail-in ballot. They’ll automatically receive one in the mail several weeks ahead of the election, removing one hurdle and some time in the process, McReynolds noted. 
 Voters in these states, and the dozens of others where people can request a mail-in ballot, can also return them at a drop box at designated locations to avoid concerns about postal service delays. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In California, voters can also return their vote-by-mail ballots at any in-person voting location, said Sam Mahood, a spokesman for the state’s Secretary of State’s Office.
 "To say Election Day is October 20th or it takes 14 days misses the mark," added McReynolds, chief executive officer of the National Vote At Home Institute, which advocates for putting voters’ needs first. "It’s not taking into account all of these other factors."
 That's not to say voters should wait until the last minute. Experts, including McReynolds, say people should make sure they are registered to vote, request a mail-in ballot as early as possible and return it well in advance of their state’s deadline. 
 One of the social media posts claims "tens of thousands" of ballots went uncounted in 2016. That is correct. In May, The Washington Post reported that of the roughly 33.2 million mail ballots received and tabulated during the 2016 general election, approximately 1 percent weren’t counted. That would amount to about 332,000 ballots. The reasons for rejection included the lack of a matching signature, problems with the return envelope and missing the deadline, the Post reported. 
 Response From Postal Service
 While the suggestion that Oct. 20 is the real vote-by-mail deadline is off base in several states, there is some truth to what the social media posts are saying about recommendations from the U.S. Postal Service. 
 In an emailed statement, a spokesperson for the agency wrote: "We recommend that jurisdictions immediately communicate and advise voters to request ballots at the earliest point allowable but no later than 15 days prior to the election date."
 It went on to say: "The Postal Service recommends that domestic, non-military voters mail their ballots at least one week prior to their state’s due date to allow for timely receipt by election officials. The Postal Service also recommends that voters contact local election officials for information about deadlines." 
 Many questions have been raised about the Postal Service’s financial challenges and whether it has the capacity to handle the load of mail-in ballots this fall. 
 The agency said its financial condition "is not going to impact our ability to process and deliver election and political mail." 
 "The Postal Service has ample capacity to adjust our nationwide processing and delivery network to meet projected Election and Political Mail volume, including any additional volume that may result as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic," it said. 
 McReynolds added that ballots represent a tiny fraction of the mail volume regularly handled by the postal service. 
 Our rating
 Several widely-shared social media posts suggest that Election Day for Americans who want to vote-by-mail is really Oct. 20 and not the official date, Nov. 3. They also say the U.S. Postal Service recommends allowing "at least 14 days roundtrip" to ensure they can request, fill-out and send back their mail-in ballots on time.
 We found some of this is accurate, but not for all states. 
 Some allow far more time for the receipt of mail-in ballots than others. Ballots are still counted in California, for example, 17 days after Election Day, as long as they are postmarked by Nov. 3. In many others, there’s no extension and ballots must be received on Election Day.
 But even in states that grant less time, voters have options. They can speed things up by using a ballot drop box or returning their ballot at in-person polling locations. 
 Giving some credence to these posts, we found the U.S. Postal Service does recommend the early request of mail-in ballots. It says voters should do that as early as possible and no later than 15 days before the election. It also recommends returning those ballots at least a week early and contacting local election officials about deadlines.
 In the end, these social media posts stretch the truth by suggesting there’s a fixed deadline of Oct. 20 to vote-by-mail in the United States. The Postal Service and elections experts encourage voters to act early, but deadlines vary by state. 
 We rate the overall claim Half True. 
 HALF TRUE – The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context.
The distribution of coronavirus vaccines in Wisconsin has been fraught with concerns about why the state started off lagging its peers and over just who was at the front of the vaccination line.
 And who was second. And third.
 Now that the dust has cleared a bit, we wanted to go back and examine what was a common theme, especially among Republicans. That is, that prison inmates should not be near the top of the list.
 For instance, on Jan. 12, 2021, when a document containing recommendations from a state committee was released, state Rep. Mark Born, R-Beaver Dam, tweeted: 
 "The committee that advises @GovEvers and his department tasked with leading during this pandemic is recommending allowing prisoners to receive the vaccine before 65 year old grandma?" 
 Is it true that a state committee recommended providing inmates with COVID-19 vaccines ahead of the state’s elderly? 
 Who falls where in line?
 At issue here is where various groups fall on the priority list for the distribution of limited COVID vaccines. It’s up to each state to establish its own list, though most started with front-line health care workers and nursing home residents.
 Republicans pushed a bill that would make the vaccine available to anyone in the state that wants it by mid-March and bar Gov. Tony Evers and his administration from prioritizing prisoners in any way as they set priorities.
 Health officials say there are many reasons for putting inmates near the top of the list, including the fact prisons have been the site of deadly outbreaks and because the state -- and its taxpayers -- have a legal obligation to assure inmates receive adequate health care. If they do not, taxpayers could be on the hook for lawsuits over unfair or inadequate treatment.
 In any case, in Wisconsin, the committee group charged with providing advice on the vaccine priority list is the Vaccine Distribution Subcommittee of the Wisconsin State Disaster Medical Advisory Committee.
 Its aim is to provide the best advice from a medical perspective, not taking into account political considerations. Its advice is also just that -- advice. The group does not have the final say in the matter. The panel collects public input on who should be prioritized in the rollout, and gives recommendations to the state Department of Health Services on how to manage each phase of the distribution. 
 When asked to provide backup for Born’s claim, his office pointed to a document released by the advisory committee on Jan. 12, 2021 -- the same day of the tweet.
 That document noted: "Current supplies of vaccine limit the ability to provide vaccine to all who wish to be vaccinated; therefore, rationing of available vaccine will be necessary until production and distribution increases to amounts sufficient to meet all needs." 
 At the time, the group was looking past health-care personnel and residents of long-term care facilities -- Priority 1A -- and was offering guidance for the next group, Priority 1B.
 The group recommended vaccines be available for anyone 70 or older, noting "the evidence of deaths in that group in Wisconsin, where 71% of deaths and hospitalization are in those 70 and above." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It also called for including staff and residents in what are termed "congregate living facilities." That category includes homeless shelters, group homes and -- yes -- correctional facilities. 
 It should be noted, the recommendation was not simply to immunize inmates in the 1B group, but also correctional workers, since the virus can be passed between individuals, and even move into a prison from the community via staff members coming to work.
 This is a good place to pause and note two things:
 First, our ratings are based on the information known at the time. It’s impossible for people to predict the future and, indeed, things changed after the recommendation was made. Ultimately, the state reduced the age guidelines for the general population in group 1B to 65 and older.
 Second, it was subtle, but Born’s tweet mentioned two groups: Not only the advisory committee, but the "department tasked with leading during this pandemic." That would be the Department of Health Services. The tweet said both were recommending inmates come before "65 year old Grandma."
 Another piece of the puzzle
 That’s where the claim runs into a problem.
 First, the document produced by the advisory committee -- and provided to us by Born’s office as backup -- includes this label: "Draft -- for discussion only." 
 While the committee was recommending that "congregate facilities" be included in Priority 1B, as the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported on Jan. 14, 2021, but according to Department of Health Services spokeswoman Elizabeth Goodsitt, the panel did not submit its recommendations to the department until Jan. 21, and they were not accepted until Jan. 25.
 "You’ll also note the eligibility groups are listed in priority order— congregate living settings are the last eligibility group listed for priority group 1B, after education and childcare, public facing essential workers, among others," Goodsitt wrote in an email to PolitiFact Wisconsin.
 Another piece of information arguing against the idea the department itself backed the inmates-before-Grandma approach, is that on Jan. 19, DHS announced those 65 and older -- not 70 and older as the panel suggested -- would be eligible for vaccinations starting Jan. 25. 
 What’s more, even now, a month later, congregate living facilities are not yet eligible.
 The next phase, which includes teachers, grocers, and anyone living in shared housing such as prisons, among other groups, is to begin March 1. 
 Our ruling
 Born tweeted "The committee that advises @GovEvers and his department tasked with leading during this pandemic is recommending allowing prisoners to receive the vaccine before 65 year old grandma?" 
 The panel did draw its line for Phase 1B at 70 year olds and included those in "congregate living facilities" -- a group that includes prison inmates. But the recommendations were not sent to the full department until days later. By that time, the department had lowered the age threshold to 65, and started that group before prisons.
 It’s unclear if blowback to the idea of inmates-before-Grandma prompted the department to take a different approach, as Republicans argue. But it is clear the department had not taken a public position at the time. 
 Our definition of Half True is "The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context."
 That fits here.
In a thread of tweets posted July 10, the West Virginia Democratic Party blames Republican Gov. Jim Justice for the state’s jump in the rate of person-to-person transmission of the novel coronavirus. 
 "Under the leadership of @WVGovernor Justice, West Virginia now has the highest rate of COVID-19 spread from person to person than any other state," the tweet begins.
 The thread pointed to an announcement by Clay Marsh, the vice president and executive dean of West Virginia University Health Sciences, that the state was ranked No. 1 nationally in the rate of transmission.
 "Today Dr. Clay Marsh announced that WV has the highest RT rate of any other state in the U.S.," the thread says. "This means that WV is spreading COVID-19 from person to person faster than any other state in the country." Bureau of Public Health commissioner Cathy Slemp, who resigned under pressure in late June, "tried to warn Justice of this days before she was fired."
 🆘😷🆘 Under the leadership of @WVGovernor Justice, West Virginia now has the highest rate of COVID-19 spread from person to person than any other state.— WV Democratic Party (@wvdemocrats) July 10, 2020 
 
 Does West Virginia, the last state in the country to confirm a positive COVID-19 case, now top the country in the rate of transmission? It does, though the tweet lacks important context about the spread of the virus in the state and the country as a whole. 
 Ranking states by Rt
 The West Virginia Democratic Party did not respond to inquiries for this article, but we did reach Marsh to discuss the relationship between the rate of transmission and the growth in coronavirus cases.
 He said scientists use two related but distinct measurements to study the spread infections such as COVID-19. One is R0, pronounced "R-naught," and the other is known as Rt, or the effective reproduction number. Both measure how many people, on average, one infected person will infect. But they measure slightly different things.
 R0 captures how fundamentally infectious a germ is when it’s introduced into a new population. By contrast, Rt measures how much the infection is spreading at a particular moment in time, taking into account factors such as the percentage of people who have already become infected and the preventive measures being taken against the infection.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "With both of these scores, any rate that is more than 1 suggests that the disease is spreading, and any rate below 1 suggests that it is reducing," Marsh told PolitiFact. 
 On July 10, the day the Democratic Party’s tweet was posted, Marsh told WVMetroNews that the state’s Rt had increased from the nation’s second lowest rate two and a half months earlier to second-worst in the country. By that afternoon, CNN had posted an article citing Marsh and reporting that West Virginia had climbed to No. 1 nationally in Rt.
 Marsh told PolitiFact that Rt is valuable for showing which direction the state’s level of infections could be heading in the following weeks. But other metrics are important as well, he said.
 Marsh said he pays attention to the positivity rate -- the percentage of newly tested people whose results come back positive for the virus. The countries and states that have been most successful have kept this measurement below 3%, and West Virginia has toggled between 3% and 5% recently. (West Virginia is also one of only 11 states that are performing an adequate number of tests to control the spread, according to a New York Times analysis.)
 Marsh said he also looks at the total change in the number of cases, using a 7-day or 14-day rolling average, and how close in-state hospitals are to their capacity for the number of ICU beds and ventilators
 In other words, Rt gives researchers an idea about how fast the disease is spreading, but it’s not the only key to understanding the virus. Andy Shi and Xihong Lin from the Harvard Chan School of Public Health agree with Marsh’s assessment in an email interview with PolitiFact.
 "Ultimately, what we are doing is we are trying to take a look at, ‘how do we measure today versus how did we measure a week ago, or two weeks ago, or a month ago,’ because that gives us a better idea about how our risk is changing," Marsh said. 
 Our ruling
 The West Virginia Democratic Party tweeted, "Under the leadership of @WVGovernor Justice, West Virginia now has the highest rate of COVID-19 spread from person to person than any other state."
 On the day the tweet was posted, West Virginia did have one of the highest rates of transmission of any state. However, using this metric communicates only one part of the picture of how hard West Virginia is getting hit by the coronavirus. 
 Among other measurements, the absolute number of coronavirus cases ranks far below the level seen in current hot-spot states like Arizona, Florida, and Texas. And the state’s positivity rate for test results is close to the low level that experts like to see.
 We rate this statement Half True.
A message that widely circulated among Iowa’s political Twitter audience claims that two Ankeny mothers known for heading Iowa’s anti-mask movement, and who attended a recent bill signing by Gov. Kim Reynolds, are QAnon supporters. QAnon is pro-Donald Trump internet conspiracy theory that says a cabal of Satan-worshiping pedophiles run the world and that Trump, under assaultby the cabal, is leading a secret fight against it.
 The new law signed by Reynolds states that leadership at public and accredited nonpublic schools cannot adopt or enforce mask mandates for students, employees or members of the public. It stems from House File 847 that passed in Iowa’s House and Senate along party lines, Republicans for it and Democrats opposed, during the final hours of the 2021 legislative session. 
 Early on May 20, Reynolds sat at her desk surrounded by clapping supporters as the bill was delivered for her signature. Next to Reynolds, in a video posted on Twitter by Speaker of the Iowa House Pat Grassley, R-New Hartford, stood two women holding signs. 
 Responding to Grassley’s tweet, Kedron Bardwell, professor and chair of political science at Simpson College, wrote in a May 20 tweet that these two women, Emily Peterson and Kimberly Reicks, are mothers from Ankeny, Iowa, and known QAnon and anti-vaccine conspiracy theorists.
 Peterson held a sign stating, "Unmask our children. #StoptheAbuse" with a picture of Evi, her daughter, on it. Reicks held a sign stating, "My mask caused a staph infection on my face four times. My body… my choice. Unmask Iowa." Her sign had a photo of her daughter, Olivia. No evidenceexists that masks cause staph infection or other health problems. 
 Update: these 2 Ankeny moms standing next to the Governor are known Qanon and anti-vaxx conspiracy theorists. 
 
 They were stars at that crazy "Health & Freedom" anti-mask conference in Oklahoma. The signature on her poster is Lin Wood. This who Kim Reynolds credited for her bill. https://t.co/8d6PKoIdoj— Kedron Bardwell (@KedronBardwell) May 21, 2021 
 We did a check on Bardwell’s claim and found that Peterson and Reicks attended the Health and Freedom conference held on April 16 and 17 in Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, and posted about their involvement on the Instagram page @freedom_over_umc. 
 Prominent QAnon sympathizers Michael Flynn, a former national security advisor for former President Trump, attended the conference. Flynn signed Petersons’ poster at the conference and spoke to the audience while holding the poster that showed Reicks’ daughter, Olivia.
 The moms posted a video of Flynn’s speech on Instagram. According to a video posted on TikTok by Reicks, the two women also spoke to the crowd about their daughters’ experience in school and their efforts to make masking optional. 
 PolitiFact Iowa reached out to Bardwell more than a half dozen times via email, phone and social media without response. It also reached out to Pat Garrett, communications director for Reynolds, more than a half dozen times via email and phone, given that Reynolds publicly has promoted getting vaccinated but making vaccinations voluntary. Garrett also declined to respond.
 PolitiFact also reached out to Peterson and Reicks for comment. Reicks said she is not with QAnon or another organization. She also said she is not an anti-vaxxer, but an EX-vaxxer. Reicks said masks and vaccines should be a choice and she doesn’t oppose or support the COVID-19 vaccine, but is waiting for "more studies to be done."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "My children have had their vaccines… they have had complications from some of them, and therefore, we no longer just go ahead and go to the doctor and get everything done," Reicks said. None of the vaccines was for COVID-19. 
 Asked directly about being part of QAnon, she said in the interview: "No, I would say I’m not associated with anything except God-driven truth. You want to put me in a category, then I’m in the God category in that I believe in freedom over fear."
 Asked about QAnon’s theories about pedophiles trying to rule, she said: "I don’t say that I would follow it, but I do believe that there are evil people out there that are sex trafficking, and that’s been proven that things like that do happen. If there’s anybody that’s willing to stand up and fight against it, I’m willing to stand behind them because I don’t believe that should be imposed on our children, ever. So, any kind of harm that anybody does to our children, I’d stand behind somebody that wants to fight against that."
 Reicks also shared a link with PolitiFact to a video of her and Peterson becoming the first recipients of Flynn’s "Fearless Fighter for American Values" award. 
 Peterson did not respond to a request for comment.
 A right-wing blog called Steel Truth featured a piece on the mothers, in which Peterson is quoted saying, "All of this was a ‘plandemic’ and it was all part of an agenda. So our children are just the recipients of it and they are the ones suffering from it. We need to listen to the truth. It’s out there, but we need to look for it. We need to find it. And we need to stop listening to the propaganda media." 
 In his Twitter thread, Bardwell says Peterson and Reicks had conspiracy theory posts all over their Facebook pages, but PolitiFact was not able to find all the posts mentioned in his thread. Peterson and Reicks share anti-vaccination information and posts like an anti-vaccine meme on various social media platforms. An Instagram account they share shows them at the Health and Freedom Conference and celebrating House File 847. Their private Facebook page called "Freedom Over Fear 2" has 2,600 members.
 Reicks also has a TikTok account with more than 7,000 followers, where she identifies as an "EX-Vaxxer." Reicks has promoted a video claiming Dr. Anthony Fauci and Bill and Melinda Gates planned the COVID-19 pandemic and made a video falsely asserting that Richard Grenell, the former nation’s director of national intelligence, is the U.S. president.
 After the Iowa bill on volunteering masks was signed, several accounts on Facebook and Twitter shared the same message celebrating Reicks and Peterson, including one user in a Facebook group, Moms Against Masks. 
 "Meet Emily Peterson and Kimberly Reicks standing tall with Iowa Governor Kim Reynolds. Emily & Kimberly stood up for all of our children and fought to bring a stop to the mask mandate for children in their state (Iowa). These two are fearless and fought at the local and state level causing GOV Reynolds to sign into Law a No Mask Mandate for our children." 
 Our ruling
 Because some posts have been deleted or taken down, PolitiFact cannot independently verify every social media claim made in Bardwell’s Twitter thread, but we did find evidence that Peterson and Reicks have supported and spread conspiracy theories, claimed the COVID-19 pandemic was planned, and support QAnon-affiliated people. 
 Though Reicks said she does not self-identify as anti-vaccine, she has shared anti-vaccine information while saying people should be able to decide on their own whether or not to take the COVID-19 vaccine. Peterson has shared anti-vaccine information publicly via social media. 
 Reicks said in the interview she does not belong to the QAnon movement, although she is connected with people known for embracing the theories. We acknowledge Reicks’ stated positions on vaccinations and not being part of QAnon but connect enough dots to rate Bardwell’s overall statement to be Mostly True.
As physicians grapple with the best ways to treat patients infected with the coronavirus, one treatment that has gained increasing attention is convalescent plasma therapy.
 This therapy involves transfusing blood plasma from recovered coronavirus patients into a sick patient. The plasma contains a specific antibody that helps the immune system fight the virus. The idea is to help give seriously ill patients an immune-system boost so they can better fight off the virus.
 COVID-19 convalescent plasma therapy is considered as an investigational product by the Food and Drug Administration. 
 Dr. Jamie N. Nadler, the medical director of quality and patient safety for Buffalo General Medical Center and Gates Vascular Institute in upstate New York, recently told the Buffalo News that there’s some evidence that it could be an effective way to treat COVID-19. 
 "There have been small trials and small attempts around the world that seem to have had some degree of success," Nadler said. "So it's worth trying as long as it's done correctly."
 Nadler is right: We found two studies of convalescent plasma therapy that have shown at least initial promise with COVID-19 patients, although experts caution that more investigation is needed. (Nadler did not respond to an inquiry for this article.)
 A brief history of convalescent plasma therapy
 Convalescent plasma therapy has a long history. It was developed by Paul Ehrlich and Emil von Behring for treatment of diphtheria, a finding that was recognized in 1901 with the first Nobel Prize for medicine, epidemiologist Dr. Ian Lipkin, a professor at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, told CNBC. 
 More recently, it was used against Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, an infection with similarities to COVID-19 that emerged in Asia in the early 2000s. 
 In one study in Hong Kong during a SARS outbreak, a hospital treated 80 patients with convalescent plasma. Among the treated patients, the study showed a higher discharge rate prior to day 14 of the illness: 58.3% became well enough to be discharged, compared with 15.6% of those who did not receive the treatment.
 However, patients suffering from Ebola — a different kind of virus in the filovirus family — did not experience positive results from convalescent plasma treatment. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A study from China in the Journal of the American Medical Association
 A Chinese study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, described a study treating five critically ill COVID-19 patients with convalescent plasma. All five patients, ranging from 36 to 65 years old, began the study while on ventilators. 
 Following the transfusion, the authors reported, four of the five patients’ body temperatures normalized within three days. Other key metrics, including viral loads, improved within 12 days.
 The hospital discharged three of the five patients. The remaining two were in stable condition 37 days after the transfusion. 
 The authors concluded that this represented an "improvement," but cautioned that the limited sample size and study design precluded "a definitive statement about the potential effectiveness of this treatment."
 A pre-publication study from China that has been posted online
 Another Chinese study found similar results. It has not yet been peer reviewed but has been published online. 
 In the study, 10 patients with severe cases received a dose of convalescent plasma. Within three days, the viral load became undetectable in seven patients, with no adverse effects. In addition, fever, cough, shortness of breath and chest pain disappeared or significantly improved in all 10 patients within one to three days of the transfusion. 
 The authors concluded that the therapy was "well tolerated and could potentially improve the clinical outcomes" in severe COVID-19 cases. However, they added, questions on the optimal dose and timing need further investigation.
 "Just as COVID-19 has taken us back to classic methods for outbreak containment like isolation, through a novel use we are rediscovering the lifesaving potential of a classic strategy like plasma therapy," Lipkin said. 
 Experts say that convalescent plasma therapy is promising, but much more work is needed.
 "There have not been any breakthroughs recently," said Jessica Donington, a professor of surgery at the University of Chicago and chief of the thoracic surgery section. But, she added, "it all has been going on very quickly," with larger clinical trials in the works.
 Our ruling
 Nadler said that "there have been small trials and small attempts around the world" to test convalescent plasma therapy for coronavirus patients, and they "seem to have had some degree of success."
 We found two Chinese studies that have found initial success, though more research is needed to confirm these results more broadly. We rate the statement True.
Michigan Lt. Gov. Garlin Gilchrist, who chairs the state’s Coronavirus Task Force on Racial Disparities, claimed that steps taken by communities of color, along with state and local efforts, have helped alleviate COVID-19’s disproportionate impact on Black residents.
 "I’m proud to report that in the State of Michigan, we were able to really flatten that disparity and make significant progress," he said at an MLK Jr. Day Youth Conference.
 Black residents make up 13.7% of Michigan’s population. But in April, they accounted for 42.93% of COVID-19 deaths, according to a Detroit Free Press analysis. That share has steadily decreased, and hit a low of 7.08% in November. Even during the second wave of the pandemic that began in the fall, the case rate among Black residents mostly remained below the rate for white people, according to data from the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services.
 Michigan seems to have bucked the national trend, as Black communities across the country continue to experience disproportionately high death rates.
 Gilchrist said the shift "is a tribute and a testimony, frankly, to people of color stepping up and doing the right things to keep themselves and their families safe." He also credited local and state efforts to address COVID-19’s toll on communities of color.
 It is impossible to know for sure what’s driving the trend. Experts we talked to backed up Gilchrist’s claim, but also pointed to other factors, including the way the pandemic has spread beyond the early hot spots.
 Geographical scope changes
 The disparities have closed statewide. But Dr. Philip Levy, a professor at the Wayne State University School of Medicine, attributed the shift in part to Detroit. The onset of the pandemic in late March hit southeast Michigan hard, and Detroit — where the population is nearly 80% Black — became a hot spot. But the city is no longer leading the surge in cases and deaths in Michigan.
 In early November, cases began raging in western Michigan. And in the late fall and early winter, the Upper Peninsula saw a big increase in COVID-19 cases and deaths.
 In the most recent phase, Detroit has stood out for its low infection rate, even compared with the rest of the metro area.
 "Despite the rise, Detroit has stayed down," said Levy. "Something must be going on, and the secret sauce, I think, is in the people themselves."
 Detroiters were impacted early
 Dawn Misra, an epidemiologist at Michigan State University who conducted a mortality review of Michiganders who died from COVID-19, said she suspects that the personal impact of the pandemic on the lives of Detroiters led the city’s residents to take the virus seriously.
 "Everyone who lives in Detroit ended up being probably close to someone they knew who died," Misra said.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Levy said Detroiters’ early and personal experiences led them to embrace mask-wearing and social distancing. "I think people really stepped up for their own personal responsibility and really recognized that they had an important role to play in this, and if people didn’t do that more people that they knew were going to die," he said.
 Black Michiganders across the state have embraced mask-wearing. A survey conducted by the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services over the summer found that 81% of Black Michiganders reported that they always wear a mask, compared with 69% of the rest of the population.
 "They listened to the science," Misra said.
 State and local efforts
 Misra also credited state and local efforts to reduce racial disparities. For instance, as cases surged in Detroit, the city rolled out rapid testing for first responders, bus drivers and health care workers, becoming the first city in the country to do so. Levy helped launch a mobile testing program in Detroit that deployed vehicles to neighborhoods where cases were rising. These were among many efforts to ramp up testing in the city, said Misra.
 In late April, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer established the task force to examine racial disparities during the pandemic. Michigan is only one of a dozen states with such a task force, according to the National Governors’ Association.
 The state’s task force set up neighborhood testing sites in at-risk communities, launched media campaigns in urban communities on wearing masks and testing and provided personal protective equipment and food for quarantined individuals.
 The virus got worse
 But another factor in the narrowing racial disparity is the increase in cases in predominantly white areas in the state.
 Jon Zelner, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Michigan, said the worsening pandemic is an "underappreciated factor" in explaining the reduction in racial disparities. "Some of the narrowing of that gap unfortunately kind of comes from an increase in overall case burden," he said.
 "When you see white deaths going up, the ratio looks better," he added.
 Our ruling
 Gilchrist claimed that Michigan has seen significant progress in reducing the racial disparities observed at the outset of the pandemic, particularly the disproportionate impact on Black residents, and credited community, state and local efforts.
 Public health experts and officials say Black residents as well as the state and local governments made significant efforts to narrow the disparity. But a surge in cases among white people has also contributed, as the impact of the pandemic spread beyond Detroit into predominantly white areas around the state.
 We rate Gilchrist’s claim Mostly True.
 Pat Byrne contributed reporting.
Some people who continue to work through the coronavirus outbreak are upset that they’re getting no additional pay, while some unemployed people are now receiving more in unemployment benefits than they were paid on the job.
 The frustration was expressed in a Facebook post directed at New York’s Democratic governor.
 "OK, so now we have a problem, Mr. Governor Andrew Cuomo," the post begins. "Non-essential people get to file for unemployment and make two to three times more than normal. The average worker bringing home $250-350 a week would be sitting at home getting $900 a week, while us essential workers are at risk putting our lifes (sic) on the line to provide for our families to make the same we always make."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 It is possible for workers in that pay range to receive unemployment payments that are two or nearly three times higher than what they were paid on the job.
 That’s the result of a federal stimulus bill signed by President Donald Trump, not due to any action taken by Cuomo. It includes $600 bonuses on weekly unemployment checks.
 But even with the bonus, higher-income workers who lose their jobs will receive less money on unemployment than they did on the job.
 The $600 bonus
 As we’ve reported:
 The federal government’s largest stimulus law — the $2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act — adds $600 per week, for up to four months, to the regular unemployment checks that people receive through their state government. 
 The bonuses began April 5, 2020 and are available through July 31, 2020.
 Doubling your pay, or more
 Nationally, unemployment checks usually are about half of what a person earned on his or her most recent job, up to a limit, which is set by each state. Benefits in some states are higher than that.
 So, to use one of the figures in the Facebook post, take a laid-off New York resident formerly earning $350 per week, or $18,200 on an annual basis. That person would typically get an unemployment check of $198 per week, according to the Fiscal Policy Institute, a New York think tank. Add the $600 bonus, and the total is $798 per week — or more than double that person’s regular pay.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At those rates, the laid-off worker would receive about $7,600 more in unemployment aid over the 17-week span of the program than they would have received in earnings if they had been able to stay at work.
 Nationally, the average weekly unemployment benefit was $385 per week as of January 2020, Gary Burtless, a senior fellow in economic studies at the Brookings Institution, told PolitiFact. With the stimulus bonus, that person’s benefit would more than double to $985 per week.
 The stimulus includes a one-time payment of $1,200 that most adults are scheduled to receive sometime in April 2020, along with payments for each dependent child age 17 or younger. But those go to the unemployed as well as the employed.
 There is no additional pay from the federal stimulus package for people who remain employed. That includes people in essential jobs such as grocery store clerks, delivery workers, food and medical supply-chain workers, and lower-paid hospital staff. 
 If essential workers were laid off, they would have to make less than $798 a week in New York to do the same or better on unemployment. Workers who made more would be made worse off, even with the government stimulus. 
 What’s happened in New York
 Although the post alludes to New York, we found no actions taken by New York state to boost pay for such workers.
 That was confirmed to us by the Fiscal Policy Institute and the Rockefeller Institute of Government, both New York-based think tanks that focus on New York state government; and the Center for New York City Affairs research organization.
 A spokesman in the governor’s office told us that Cuomo has taken steps, such as waiving a waiting period, to make it easier to collect unemployment.
 Some states have tried to help certain workers in other ways. For example, New York, Illinois and Maryland are offering child care assistance to certain essential workers. 
 Also, in Saratoga County, N.Y., county officials are defending their decision to pay time-and-a-half to 340 employees deemed essential, the Daily Gazette reported. The cost for the overtime, which is being paid to about one-quarter of the workforce, is $150,000 per week.
 Several experts noted to us that some federal officials have discussed the possibility in a future stimulus bill of providing additional pay to essential workers.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said that "non-essential people get to file for unemployment and make two to three times more than normal," but essential workers still on the job get no pay raise.
 This dynamic only applies to some workers who have modest incomes. For four months, from April through July of 2020, unemployed people are eligible for $600-per-week federal bonuses that, in some cases, can double or nearly triple what they earned on the job. 
 We rate the Facebook statement Half True.
Assemblymember Ron Kim has been concerned about nursing home residents during the COVID-19 pandemic, and his policy disagreements with Gov. Andrew Cuomo garnered national attention after he said Cuomo bullied him during a phone call.
 New York approved broad legal protections for health care facilities during the pandemic as part of the 2020-21 state budget. The protections, retroactive to March 7, were meant to relieve some of the burden on the health care system amid an emergency. They were narrowed in August.
 But legislators have said the protections were not widely known when the New York State Legislature passed the budget in April. Kim, who voted against the budget for other reasons, said that he found out about them from a reporter months later.
 In an interview with Brian Lehrer on WNYC, the Queens Democrat said that Cuomo "issued a legal blanket immunity, and snuck that into our budget, giving these facilities essentially a license to kill, a get-out-of-jail free card." 
 These legal protections are a source of concern for people whose loved ones died in nursing homes, and we wondered about the breadth of the legal immunity granted to nursing homes. 
 ‘Blanket immunity’
 Kim said the provision grants health care facilities "legal blanket immunity." 
 The protections are broad, but even nursing home advocates say they don’t provide blanket immunity. The original provision limited liability for health care workers, administrators, board members, and health facilities, including hospitals and nursing homes, as long as a state of emergency remains in effect. It pertained to the care of any patient, whether sick from COVID-19 or not. An amendment to the law in August limited the scope of the law to only coronavirus patients. 
 Under the law, health workers and health facilities "shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, for any harm or damages" related to the delivery of health care. The law does not apply in cases of "willful or intentional criminal misconduct, gross negligence, reckless misconduct, or intentional infliction of harm …" But it also states that "acts, omissions or decisions" resulting from shortages of staff or resources should not be considered "willful or intentional criminal misconduct, gross negligence, reckless misconduct, or intentional infliction of harm." 
 Margaret Somerset, a lawyer with Underberg & Kessler in the Rochester area who represents nursing homes, said that the law only provides qualified immunity from civil and criminal prosecution if the medical provider does not act with gross negligence or recklessness. She also said that the law specifically states that shortages of PPE or staffing may not be used as evidence of gross negligence or recklessness. The law was also amended in August 2020 to limit its application to providers engaged in either diagnosing or treating Covid-19 patients. 
 A report from state Attorney General Letitia James said the law should not be interpreted to mean it provides "blanket immunity," but it also raised concerns.
 "Due to several recent changes in law, it is unclear to what extent facilities or individuals can be held accountable if found to have failed appropriately to protect the residents in their care," the report said. It also said James disagrees with any interpretation that the law provides blanket immunity for things other than intentional harm, even when related to intentional resource and staffing allocations, calling it "illogical, contrary to public policy, and contrary to the law’s intent."
 Nina A. Kohn, a distinguished scholar in elder law at Yale University and a law professor at Syracuse University, said Kim’s use of "blanket immunity" is how she would expect a layperson to use the term. But legally speaking, it’s not accurate, because the law does not say that you can never be held liable for anything. 
 Nonetheless, Kohn said, the law gives "a green light for facilities to understaff and underresource. The language seems plain to me." 
 The exceptions, however, such as gross negligence, can be difficult to prove. James Snyder, a plaintiff’s lawyer in the Syracuse area who has written about the immunity law, said gross negligence exists in New York law, "but imposes an incredibly high burden of proof upon anyone attempting to make a claim for personal injury pursuant to it." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ‘Snuck it in’
 Kim said the governor snuck the immunity protections into the budget. Kim’s chief of staff, Tony Cao, told us that when Kim inquired about the provision, once he learned about it after the budget vote, he was told by Assembly leadership that the administration fought forcefully for the provision, telling both houses it was non-negotiable. 
 Kim’s office also provided a letter from the Greater New York Hospital Association, which hailed the passage of the provision. "GNYHA drafted and aggressively advocated for this legislation," President Kenneth Raske wrote to the association’s members. 
 We asked the Cuomo administration about the provision, and aides said that the budget, which is voted on by legislators, is the subject of negotiations between the executive chamber and both houses of the State Legislature. 
 "It’s an impossibility to ‘sneak’ anything in to the budget — we engage with legislative staff in ongoing negotiations throughout the budget process, those staff must physically sign off on every individual provision before the bill is printed, and every legislator can of course read the language themselves," said Beth Garvey, special counsel and senior advisor to Cuomo. 
 The budget bills run hundreds of pages, and lawmakers typically have only hours from the time they are printed until the vote. The Assembly passed the 2020-21 budget in the wee hours of the morning. 
 ‘License to kill’
 Kim said that nursing homes have "essentially a license to kill" and a "get-out-of-jail free card." 
 Cao, Kim’s chief of staff, said that isn’t hyperbole. When the order granting immunity is combined with other measures the administration took to ease the burden on health care workers and institutions navigating an unforeseen crisis -- as well as the high bar to prove gross negligence, recklessness or intentional harm in court --– he said families have little recourse if their loved ones were harmed in nursing homes during the pandemic.
 
 
 
 Cao pointed to an executive order relaxing paperwork requirements, which expired at the end of December. "Any person acting reasonably and in good faith under this provision shall be afforded absolute immunity from liability for any failure to comply with any recordkeeping requirement," it stated. Without paperwork documenting patients’ conditions, and with the pandemic preventing visits by family members, building a case is impossible, Cao said.
 
 
 
 The Cuomo administration said the expectation and intent of the recordkeeping order was not that facilities would keep no records, but that they did not always have to stringently complete records at all times during the emergency, Garvey said. Many of those records were finalized after the fact, she said. 
 
 
 The Cuomo administration’s position is that the intent of the law was to prevent lawsuits unless there was intentional misconduct. If a facility accepted patients it could not care for properly due to staff or resource shortages, that could be intentional misconduct, she said. 
 But the attorney general’s report raises the possibility of a loophole in the law. It states that the law "is silent as to whether the safe-harbor for ‘resource or staffing shortage’ is to be assessed only based on conditions that arose as a result of the COVID-19 emergency or whether it" applies to shortages that existed before the emergency declaration. 
 The attorney general’s investigation found that poorly staffed nursing homes had higher death rates. James recommends eliminating the immunity provisions because they "can provide financial incentives to for-profit nursing home operators to put residents at risk of harm" by not employing enough caregivers or purchasing enough personal protective equipment.
 Our ruling
 Kim said that a law protecting health care facilities gave them "blanket immunity," was snuck into the budget by Cuomo, gave health care facilities get out of jail free cards and a license to kill. 
 The law contained broad protections, but doesn’t grant blanket immunity. Experts disagree on how broad the protections are. It will likely take court cases to resolve that question. 
 While Cuomo may have fought aggressively for the law during budget negotiations, saying that he "snuck it in" minimizes the legislature’s role. Staff and leaders knew about the provision even if many members didn’t. 
 
 
 
 Kim’s use of "essentially" when describing a "license to kill" modifies it somewhat. Even the Attorney General’s Office said it is unclear to what extent facilities or individuals can be held accountable if found to have failed appropriately to protect the residents in their care. But the law contains exceptions for some criminal conduct. 
 Coupled with other actions the Cuomo administration took to aid health workers and prevent virus transmission in nursing homes - relaxing recordkeeping requirements related to patient care and prohibiting visitors - families will have difficulty winning cases against nursing homes.
 
 
 
 Kim conveyed the difficulty families have in holding nursing homes accountable, but his statement goes too far because the the immunity protections do not cover everything. 
 He made a compelling statement that has elements of truth.
 
 
 
 We rate his statement Half True.
The Rev. Raphael Warnock, a Democrat and first-time candidate running to unseat Georgia GOP Sen. Kelly Loeffler, accused her of using her position to profit from the coronavirus outbreak.
 "We have a United States senator, Kelly Loeffler, unelected by the people of Georgia who, when she heard about COVID-19 seemed much more focused on her own portfolio than the people she was sent there to represent," Warnock said on MSNBC. "She profited from the pandemic."
 Warnock was referring to ethics complaints about questionable stock trades by Loeffler and other senators after an early briefing about the coronavirus threat. 
 Financial disclosures and news reports show that on the day of the briefing and in the weeks afterward, Loeffler’s accounts engaged in various stock trades involving companies that would be affected by a disease outbreak, and some of those trades helped her make profits, or avert big losses.
 Loeffler has denied using nonpublic information to benefit financially, and a Senate Ethics Committee investigation found no evidence that Loeffler violated any laws or Senate rules. 
 Crowded race is a tossup
 Warnock is the senior pastor of Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. preached. Warnock is among 21 candidates competing to fill the seat held by Republican Sen. Johnny Isakson, who resigned in December with health problems. Loeffler, an Atlanta businesswoman, was appointed on an interim basis. If no candidate gets at least 50% of the vote, the top two vote-getters will face each other in a runoff Jan. 5. 
 The race is one of 18 pivotal House and Senate contests up for election Nov. 3 that PolitiFact is tracking. It’s rated a tossup by the Cook Political Report. So is Georgia’s other Senate contest, which pits Republican incumbent David Perdue against Democrat Jon Ossoff.
 Private COVID-19 briefing, quick stock moves
 Loeffler’s stock trades during the period before the potential threat of the virus became widely known surfaced in news stories early in the pandemic, and crystallized with complaints made to the Senate Ethics Committee that targeted several other senators as well. 
 Here’s a timeline, based on the complaints and news reports:
 Jan. 24: Loeffler attended a private briefing for senators from administration officials about "an emerging public health threat" posed by the novel coronavirus, just three days after the first case in the United States had been confirmed. 
 Jan. 24 - Feb. 14: Loeffler and her husband made more than 20 stock sales amounting to between $1.275 million and $3.1 million. Loeffler also bought stock in two companies, including Citrix, which produces teleworking software. 
 Feb. 14: The stock market began a tumble that would take the Dow Jones Industrial Average down by 36% over the next five weeks. (It recouped most of those losses over the next several months.)
 Feb. 26 - March 11: $18.7 million in shares of Intercontinental Exchange stock were sold on Loeffler’s behalf in three separate deals, among other trades from mid-February to mid-March, the Atlanta Journal Constitution reported in April. Loeffler is a former executive with the company, which owns the New York Stock Exchange, and her husband, Jeff Sprecher, is the CEO.
 March 13: President Donald Trump declared a national emergency concerning the COVID-19 outbreak as shutdowns began across the country.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 March 20: Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, or CREW, filed a complaint asking the Senate Ethics Committee to investigate Loeffler and another GOP senator, Richard Burr of North Carolina. Another government watchdog group, Common Cause, filed similar complaints against those two and two other senators, Democrat Dianne Feinstein of California and Republican James Inhofe of Oklahoma. The CREW complaint alleged that Loeffler violated insider trading laws and the STOCK Act, which bars members of Congress from using nonpublic information for private profit.
 June 16: The Senate Ethics Committee dismissed its investigation into Loeffler, saying it "did not find evidence" that she violated the law or Senate rules. It did not elaborate. The Department of Justice had also conducted a probe, but closed it in May with no action.
 Days after the Journal Constitution report, Loeffler announced that she and her husband would divest themselves of all individual stocks and move their money into mutual and exchange-traded funds.
 "I have never used any confidential information I received while performing my Senate duties as a means of making a private profit, she said then. "Nor has anyone in my family."
 Loeffler campaign communications director Stephen Lawson told PolitiFact that Loeffler and her husband had no role in the transactions.
 "She had no knowledge, no control, no communication, none of that" with the "third-party advisers" who handled all of the transactions, he said.
 Lawson said Loeffler ultimately lost $1.3 million in the "liquidation" of her stocks.
 Stocks connected to the outbreak
 Asked for information to support Warnock’s attack, his campaign highlighted a number of Loeffler transactions, citing news reports and Senate disclosure reports made by Loeffler. The transactions involved shares of companies that were affected by changes brought on by the pandemic. Some examples:
 
 
 Loeffler and her husband bought stock in Citrix on Feb. 14 and sold it on April 7, creating a gain of $33,285.
 
 
 On Feb. 14, Loeffler sold between $250,001 and $500,000 worth of stock in Exxon Mobil from an account owned jointly with her husband, avoiding losses that would occur as the outbreak took hold. The stock then was trading at around $60 per share; by the end of March, it had tumbled to about $31. 
 
 
 Between Feb. 28 and March 10, Loeffler’s husband purchased $206,774 worth of stock in DuPont de Nemours, which produces protective suits used by health care workers.
 
 
 Our ruling
 Warnock claimed Loeffler "focused on her own portfolio" after hearing about the COVID-19 threat and "profited from the pandemic," suggesting that she used non-public information about the coronavirus outbreak to make beneficial stock trades.
 Loeffler denied using inside information, and Senate Ethics Committee and Justice Department investigations found she did not violate laws or Senate rules barring insider trading. 
 Her disclosures and other news reports show that on the day she received a private coronavirus briefing and in the weeks weeks afterward, there were stock trades made on her behalf involving companies that would be affected by the pandemic, and she benefited from those trades. 
 We rate the statement Half True.
 This fact check is available at IFCN’s 2020 US Elections FactChat #Chatbot on WhatsApp. Click here, for more.
An image on Instagram takes aim at four pharmaceutical companies’ records to imply that their COVID-19 vaccines are unsafe.
 The headline on the post is "Choosing your COVID-19 vaccine — facts you need to know."
 Below, in a table with the company logos, are claims that one manufacturer faced $4.7 billion in fines; one had never brought a vaccine to market; one was sued hundreds of thousands of times for dangerous products; and the fourth had its vaccine "suspended" by European countries for "lethal" adverse health effects.
 The sarcastic ender: "Don’t worry, you’re in safe hands!"
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The individual statements about the manufacturers’ records are based on facts, according to news and research reports. But in trying to draw a connection between these statements and the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines, the post leaves out context about research that has shown the vaccines to be safe and effective.
 The individual statements
 "Pfizer: $4.7 billion in fines for false claims, drug and medical equipment safety violations, off-label promotion, corrupt practices, kickbacks and bribery."
 From 1991 through 2017, Pfizer paid $4.7 billion in financial penalties in settlements with federal and state agencies, according to a 2018 report about the pharmaceutical industry from Public Citizen, a government watchdog. That included $2.3 billion in 2009 for unlawful promotion of several drugs and kickbacks to prescribing physicians.
 "Moderna: Has never brought a vaccine to market since its founding."
 Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine is the company’s first to be authorized. The company was founded in 2010 to develop medicines based on messenger RNA and has worked with other pharmaceutical companies and research bodies on personalized cancer vaccines and other types of vaccine programs.
 "Johnson & Johnson: "Named in hundreds of thousands of lawsuits for toxic and/or dangerous products, including drugs."
 Among the lawsuits: 25,000 over its blood thinner Xarelto; 25,000 over pelvic mesh; and 14,000 over its talc-based baby powder, according to a 2019 news article by The Guardian. A 2019 Bloomberg report said the company faced at least 100,000 cases over those products and others.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "AstraZeneca: Suspended by two dozen European countries due to severe, lethal adverse reactions, like blood clots."
 In March 2021, some two dozen countries suspended use of the company’s COVID-19 vaccine as a precaution over reports of dangerous blood clots in some recipients. The suspensions were lifted within weeks.
 The vaccines’ safety record
 The Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and Johnson & Johnson vaccines have received federal emergency authorization for use in the U.S. and have produced strong safety records. (The Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines require two doses for full vaccination, the Johnson & Johnson is a one-dose vaccine.)
 More than 331 million doses of all three vaccines have been given in the United States, according to the CDC. More than 182 million Americans (55% of the population) have received at least one dose so far, with minimal complications reported despite the massive sample size.
 The federal Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System has received 5,718 reports of death (0.0018%) among people who received a COVID-19 vaccine. Those reports on their own do not establish whether a death was caused by the vaccine.
 "A review of available clinical information, including death certificates, autopsy, and medical records, has not established a causal link to COVID-19 vaccines," the CDC said.
 Two serious, but rare types of health problems have been found to occur in vaccinated people, the CDC says. They are anaphylaxis (severe allergic reaction) and, after vaccination with Johnson & Johnson vaccine,thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (blood clots). 
 The blood clot condition occurs in about seven per 1 million vaccinated women between 18 and 49 years old. The CDC in early May recommended resuming the use of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine after a brief pause to study the blood-clot cases, and said it would continue monitoring the reports. The CDC is also monitoring reports of myocarditis and pericarditis (heart inflammation), primarily in adolescents and young adults who received the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine.
 The AstraZeneca vaccine is not authorized for use in the U.S. After the vaccine was suspended in many European countries pending an inquiry into blood-clot cases, European regulators declared March 18 that it is safe and effective. A month later, they reaffirmed their recommendation to use the vaccine, calling the clot cases "very rare." 
 Meanwhile, reports continue to come in that many to most COVID-19 deaths in the United States are occurring among unvaccinated people.
 Our ruling
 An Instagram post makes statements about the records of four pharmaceutical companies to imply that the COVID-19 vaccines they make are unsafe.
 The individual statements accurately reflect the companies’ track records, though in some cases, they don’t relate to the companies’ COVID-19 vaccines. 
 In presenting these statements as a basis for judging the safety of their COVID-19 vaccines, the post leaves out important context about the companies' broader safety record and research studies and real-world experience that have shown the vaccines to be safe and effective.
 The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details. Our rating is Half True.
Congress and the Trump administration have approved about $3 trillion in coronavirus relief in four separate measures over the last two months, including extra unemployment benefits, aid to hospitals and loans aimed at small businesses. 
 So, this May 15, 2020 tweet from U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Wisconsin, caught our attention:
 "The Trump Administration is trying to take food assistance away from Wisconsin families when people are out of work and struggling." 
 Is she right?
 The evidence 
 When asked to back up the claim, a Baldwin staffer pointed PolitiFact Wisconsin to a lawsuit involving the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which administers the nation’s food assistance programs, including SNAP, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
 The USDA released a proposed rule Feb. 1, 2019, that would make it harder for states to waive work requirements for able-bodied adults without dependents. In March of that year, 47 Republican and Democratic Senators urged the Administration to withdraw the rule. But on Dec. 4, 2019, the Administration released the final rule.
 The rule change was set to take effect April 1, 2020. Prior to the economic damage caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the rule was expected to cut off basic food assistance for nearly 700,000 people. However, a coalition of states filed a lawsuit to challenge the rule change. 
 A federal judge issued an injunction March 13, 2020, to temporarily block implementation of the rule change. 
 "As a global pandemic poses widespread health risks, guaranteeing that government officials at both the federal and state levels have flexibility to address the nutritional needs of residents and ensure their well-being through programs like SNAP, is essential," Chief Judge Beryl Howell of the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., wrote in her March 13, 2020 opinion.
 So that puts things on hold.
 And the Families First Coronavirus Response Act -- one of the measures passed by Congress amid the pandemic -- waived the work requirement for able-bodied adults without dependents for the duration of the COVID-19 public health emergency.
 So, how is Trump trying to "take food assistance away from Wisconsin families"?
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The view from Baldwin’s staff: "The USDA is continuing to defend the rule change and filed a notice earlier this month that it is appealing the temporary injunction to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit." 
 In a May 13, 2020 article from TIME magazine, U.S. Rep. Marcia Fudge, D-Ohio, chair of the House Agriculture Subcommittee on Nutrition, Oversight and Department Operations, labeled the USDA’s effort to continue the case a "cruel pursuit of unrealistic policy."
 So, while the lawsuit is on hold and work requirements are temporarily suspended, the administration is continuing to pursue the case. If ultimately successful, the change could then remove nearly 700,000 people from the SNAP program.
 The response
 The USDA pointed PolitiFact Wisconsin to an April 22, 2020 news release from the agency that noted there had been a 40% increase in monthly SNAP benefits amid the pandemic. 
 "Ensuring all households receive the maximum allowable SNAP benefit is an important part of President Trump’s whole of America response to the coronavirus," U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue said in the statement.
 The agency cited other food assistance initiatives, including distribution of millions of pounds of food in response to the COVID-19 crisis. The agency did not address the rule change in its email to PolitiFact Wisconsin, but in a May 13, 2020 Reuters article, the agency said it has been "extremely aggressive" to ensure food needs are met during the pandemic. 
 "While we’re currently in a very challenging environment, we do not expect this to last forever," the agency said, adding "we must prepare our workforce to rejoin the economy when our nation reopens." 
 So, in effect, the administration is doubling down on its position as it relates to the lawsuit.
 Our ruling
 Baldwin said "the Trump Administration is trying to take food assistance away from Wisconsin families when people are out of work and struggling." 
 Congress and the Trump administration have launched various assistance initiatives during the pandemic. And one measure specifically lifted a work-related requirement. 
 However, at the same time, the administration doubled down on its support of a proposed SNAP rule change that would in effect cut off basic food assistance for nearly 700,000 people -- once an emergency is lifted, and if the agency successfully fends off a lawsuit. 
 We rate the claim Half True.
In his Democratic convention address, former President Bill Clinton took a shot at President Donald Trump’s economic record during the coronavirus pandemic, saying the 45th president has botched his handling of the twin health and economic crises.
 "Donald Trump says we’re leading the world," Clinton said. "Well, we are the only major industrial economy to have its unemployment rate triple."
 Using the most clear-cut multi-nation comparison — comparing January to June 2020 — Clinton is right. But it’s worth noting some differences in how countries address unemployment.
 We turned to data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a think tank whose members are advanced industrialized countries. The group collects economic statistics for all its members, including unemployment rates. We chose 20 countries for which data was available, including most of the countries in western Europe, plus Canada, Australia, Japan, South Korea, and Israel. 
 For consistency’s sake, we compared January to June because only two of the countries reported data for July. 
 As the following chart shows, the United States was among the few countries to show a dramatic increase in the unemployment rate between January and June. The U.S. is the peach-colored line with the steep climb; you can see each country highlighted if you hover over the list of countries at the bottom.
 
 The United States saw its unemployment rate increase from 3.6% to 11.1%. That works out to a little under 3.1 times higher in June than January.
 No other country saw such a big increase. 
 The only other nation that saw its unemployment rate more than double over that period was Canada, which saw its rate increase 2.2 times. Canada actually had a higher unemployment rate in June than the U.S. did, at 12.3%, but the scale of Canada’s increase was more modest than the United States’ because Canada had a higher rate to start, at 5.5%.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 10, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Italy drastically reduced the country’s official COV1D-19 death count by over 97%. This means Covid killed fewer people than an average seasonal flu.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Using U.S. data for February instead of January doesn’t change the picture much. The U.S. unemployment rate in February was 3.5%, making the increase through June about 3.2 times.
 There are a couple asterisks to Clinton’s statement.
 If you compare January to July, a month for which data isn’t available for most of the OECD nations, the increase in the United States was still substantial, but just short of three times higher. The unemployment rate rose from 3.6% in January to 10.2% in July, meaning an increase of 2.8 times.
 It’s also worth noting that the U.S. unemployment rate has fallen for three straight months, amid a zigzagging reopening and a volatile economy. So the unemployment rate is likely to bounce around a bit before it settles down.
 Finally, the OECD itself notes some differences across countries. Some nations have used more aggressive efforts than the United States to subsidize workers to remain on payrolls. And some countries, such as the United Kingdom, do not count "temporarily" laid-off workers as unemployed, while the United States does count such workers as unemployed.
 Our ruling
 Clinton said the United States is "the only major industrial economy to have its unemployment rate triple" since the coronavirus pandemic began.
 That’s accurate for the broadest comparison — a 20-nation selection of OECD nations between January 2020 and June 2020. The rate in the U.S. was 3.1 times higher in June than in January. Only Canada came close, with the unemployment rate 2.2 times higher over that period.
 However, extending the U.S. data to July showed that the increase fell slightly below three times, and there are some complications in making cross-country comparisons.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
 UPDATE, Aug. 20: This article has been updated with additional context about the complications of making cross-country comparisons of unemployment rates. The rating remains the same.
From the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, Sweden made itself a compelling case study, forgoing lockdowns and mandates, keeping its society largely open — and prompting claims that it was faring better with COVID-19 than the United States.
 Early on, we found such statements were overstated. Now, nearly a year and a half later, as the virus’ delta variant spikes cases, the claims have reemerged.
 One widely shared on Facebook came from Steve Deace, the host of a show on the conservative Blaze TV streaming network. He has promoted Sweden’s approach as better than the United States’.
 Alluding to the 27-nation European Union, which includes Sweden, Deace wrote: 
 "In the month of July, Sweden recorded a grand total of 9 deaths with Covid in a nation of over 10 million. Lowest mask compliance in EU, least locked down country in EU from beginning, and just 41% fully vaccinated. Also codes Covid deaths similar to how we do."
 Deace’s post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The post has a point in terms of its characterization of Sweden’s response to the pandemic, its vaccination rate and a relatively small number of COVID-19 deaths in July.
 But cherry picking one statistic — the raw number of deaths in a single month — leaves a misleading impression of conditions and trends in Sweden.
 Asked whether he was implying that there is a connection between the July deaths and Sweden’s low vaccination rates, relaxed lockdown rules and low mask compliance, Deace told us: "I actually trust readers to draw their own conclusions from the data."
 How Sweden is different
 In contrast to some of its neighbors and the U.S., Sweden’s society has remained largely open during the pandemic, as the government responded mostly with guidelines, not stay-at-home orders and quarantines. Masks generally were not recommended.
 In April 2020, in the weeks after the outbreak was declared a pandemic, we looked at two claims that touted Sweden’s more hands-off approach as superior to lockdown policies imposed in Europe and the U.S. We found that infection rate cited in one of these claims was not a reliable indicator of how a country was doing, given that it depended on how much testing was being done; and that Sweden’s COVID-19 death rate was higher than two of its neighbors. 
 As of Aug. 4, 42% of Sweden’s population was fully vaccinated; that compares with 49% in the U.S. and 50% in the EU, according to Our World in Data. Sweden’s guidelines emphasize staying at home, testing, hand washing and social distancing.
 We found Sweden’s COVID-19 death counts for July 2021 a bit higher than the nine the post claims. Sweden had a cumulative 14,630 COVID-19 deaths as of July 1, 2021, and 14,655 on July 31 — an increase of 25, according to Our World in Data. 
 How the post is misleading
 The post looks at deaths only for July 2021. But Sweden has seen wide variations in its COVID-19 caseloads and death toll since last year.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By April 2021, there were signs that Sweden’s approach had flaws. At that point, the New Yorker reported, Sweden’s per-capita case counts and death rates were many times higher than any of its Nordic neighbors, all of which imposed lockdowns, travel bans and limited gatherings early on.
 The latest figures show Sweden’s COVID-19 death rate is lower than in the European Union and the U.S. — but it has more than doubled in the past 10 months. 
 Anders Tegnell, Sweden’s top epidemiologist, told PolitiFact that the death rate has risen in many countries. "We have had two severe waves. The excess mortality is comparably low," he said.
 Excess mortality, as defined by the World Health Organization, is the difference between the observed numbers of deaths and the expected number of deaths for a specific time period.
 Our World in Data’s measure of the seven-day rolling average of COVID-19 deaths per 1 million people shows that Sweden had higher spikes than those in the EU and the U.S. at several points during the pandemic, including early 2020 and early 2021. And for most of this year, its per capita confirmed cases have exceeded the figures for the U.S. and the EU.
 
 
 Overall, Sweden’s COVID-19 death rate of 142.5 per 100,000 population is well above neighbors Denmark (43.89), Finland (17.84), Norway (15.03) and Iceland (8.3), according to Johns Hopkins University.
 
 As for infections, after a wave in the spring of 2021, Sweden saw its infection rate drop, which officials attributed primarily to vaccinations and to people being outdoors more, Reuters reported. 
 But now it’s on the rise again. 
 In its latest weekly report, on Aug. 5, the Swedish Public Health Agency reported 3,451 confirmed cases of COVID-19, a 30% increase over the previous week. 
 Our ruling
 Deace claims that Sweden had few COVID deaths in July, despite low vaccination rates, relaxed lockdown rules and low mask compliance.
 Sweden has imposed fewer restrictions than other countries and had few deaths in July, but its COVID-19 death rate has been above the U.S. and the EU at various times during the pandemic. Sweden has had more COVID-19 deaths per capita than its neighbors, and infections are rising.
 The post cherry-picks data from a single month, and leaves out substantial context about Sweden’s COVID-19 experience since the pandemic began.
 We rate the claim Half True.
That Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky often disagrees with infectious-disease expert Dr. Anthony Fauci is well known.
 Recently, the pair clashed at a Senate hearing when Paul, a Republican, argued against mask recommendations for people who have had Covid-19 or have been vaccinated against it.
 At the hearing, Fauci, President Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, pushed back against Paul’s characterization of wearing masks as "theater." Continued caution is advised, Fauci said, as scientists study the new variants now circulating in the U.S. and other countries.
 Paul, an eye doctor by training, continued the squabble a few days later, calling out Fauci in a tweet, pointing to a study that he said "shows vaccines and naturally acquired immunity DO effectively neutralize COVID variants."
 The tweet linked to a study published online at the JAMA Network, a family of specialty medical journals.
 We reached out to Paul’s office for additional sources for his tweet but did not receive a reply.
 So, we asked the experts: Are Covid variants effectively neutralized by vaccines or natural immunity conferred on people who recover from the illness?
 In short, the research cited by Paul does show good blood levels of neutralizing antibodies against at least some of the current variants following infection or vaccination. But they’re not the whole story.
 Mehul S. Suthar, an author of the study Paul cited, said the results are encouraging but should not be seen as all-encompassing: "Our interpretation is that our study looks at one aspect of immune response, antibodies."
 Small samples. Big questions.
 Neutralizing antibodies are important because they can block the ability of a virus like the one that causes Covid to infect cells. But the body also has other defenses. T cells, for example, can be spurred by infection or vaccination, Suthar said, although the study was not designed to look at those.
 For the study, researchers gathered blood samples from 40 people who were in the hospital with Covid or had recovered from it. From the National Institutes of Health, they also received blood samples drawn from 14 people who had gotten both doses of the Moderna vaccine, said Suthar, an assistant professor at Emory University’s vaccine center.
 Then they ran tests on those samples against the original SARS-CoV-2 virus and three variants, including the one dubbed B.1.1.7, which first appeared in the United Kingdom and is now circulating widely in the U.S.
 They wanted to know: Did antibodies produced by being infected or vaccinated neutralize B.1.1.7?
 "We are lucky with B.1.1.7 that our antibodies appear to work well against this virus," Suthar said.
 However, as with any study, there are caveats. For one thing, the results were based on a small number of samples. And the analysis did not include other variants of concern, such as the ones that emerged in South Africa and Brazil, which limits the ability to draw broad conclusions.
 Finally, antibodies are just one measure of potential protection against disease. Laboratory research measuring antibodies indicates that some immunity is created by both illness and vaccination, but the strength and longevity of that protection — the effectiveness in the real world — is a separate question. That’s partly because the ideal level of neutralizing antibodies needed for protection is not known and other immune protections, such as T cells, aren’t measured.
 Also, in the real world, other factors — such as the variant a person is exposed to, and the presence of other mitigating factors, including masks and good ventilation — can make a difference.
 "Part of the reason that real world data are so important is looking at the whole picture of immunity," said Gigi Gronvall, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. "Also, with the level of community transmissions of disease, I would be concerned that there will be more variants that emerge."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nuance matters
 Paul’s tweet — taking aim at what he sees as an overcautious approach by public health experts — doesn’t capture that type of nuance, nor does it reference studies on the other emerging variants.
 "Blanket assertions made by non-scientific experts are not going to help," said Gronvall.
 Dr. Jesse Goodman, professor of medicine and a specialist in infectious diseases at Georgetown University, agreed.
 "It’s wrong to declare victory and say there’s no problem with variants and that everyone previously infected will be fine," said Goodman, who served as chief scientist of the Food and Drug Administration under the Obama administration.
 Viruses naturally mutate as they replicate. So it’s not surprising that the coronavirus has done so. Several variants have emerged, including home-grown ones from California and New York.
 Lab tests on blood samples from vaccine trial participants in South Africa showed lower levels of neutralizing antibody production, possibly related to the variant circulating there.
 How big a difference the lower levels measured in those samples make isn’t yet known.
 Levels are still high and could "effectively neutralize the virus," Fauci wrote in an editorial published Feb. 11 in JAMA.
 Even so, clinical trials used to test Covid vaccines before they were approved for emergency use showed lower efficacy when tested in areas where the South African variant was circulating.
 "We expect vaccines and prior infection to offer significant protection against variants that are closely related," said Goodman. "But as they become more genetically different — like the South African one — that protection could go down."
 The main goal of the vaccines is to prevent hospitalization and death, and all the vaccines in use in the U.S. appear to substantially reduce the risk of hospitalization and death from Covid, according to research.
 "Even if the current vaccines may not be perfect, they do appear to prevent more severe outcomes," Goodman said.
 Don’t assume, as Paul’s tweet implies, that recovering from covid or getting vaccinated means zero risk of infection.
 For one thing, reinfection is rare but can occur.
 Goodman pointed to a recent study conducted in Denmark showing that a small percentage (0.65%) of people who tested positive for Covid in the spring fell ill again.
 "People should not presume that even if they had the vaccine or were previously infected that there’s no future risk," Goodman said.
 Even though no vaccine is 100% effective, Gronvall at Hopkins said not to use that as an excuse to avoid inoculation.
 "The vaccines appear to be great," she said. "Get one when you can."
 Our ruling
 Paul is correct that the JAMA study showed vaccination or previous infection appeared, based on a small sample of people, to help neutralize the virus. However, he left out important details that make his position an oversimplification of a complicated issue.
 The study considered only one variant — the one that emerged in the U.K. — and did not include an analysis of other types now circulating, or the potential for additional variants that could emerge. Also, the type of antibody studied is just one factor in protecting against disease, and just what those levels of neutralizing antibodies measured in a laboratory experiment may mean in the real world is not known.
 So, for those reasons, we rate the senator’s statement Half True.
In a Sept. 15, 2020, daily briefing on the COVID-19 pandemic, Gov. Tony Evers made his case that Wisconsin needs to take the coronavirus more seriously.
 "We need to take every precaution, perhaps more than ever to keep our families, neighbors and communities safe," Evers said. "On Sunday, we had another record-setting day for the number of positive cases."
 That’s correct — the 1,582 tally on Sept. 13 was the highest yet.
 Then the governor addressed where Wisconsin stood relative to other states.
 "According to a nationwide analysis, Wisconsin is one of the nine states with the highest rate of infection per capita," Evers said. "We cannot continue on this path. At one point, Wisconsin was in a pretty good place, but that is no longer the case."
 Is Wisconsin really among the nine worst states in the nation?
 Evers is right about trending in the wrong direction, but his description of the stat isn’t quite right.
 Let’s take a closer look.
 Wisconsin cases have spiked
 Asked for evidence of the nine-worst-states claim, Evers’ staff pointed to a New York Times breakdown of cases by state.
 The analysis, updated daily, shows Wisconsin as of Sept. 15 had the fifth-highest number of new cases per capita over the last seven days — 147 per 100,000 residents. Only North Dakota, South Dakota, Missouri and Oklahoma were worse in that span.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Times used that data to identify Wisconsin as one of nine states "where new cases are higher and staying high."
 Indeed, since the start of September, the number of new cases and the percentage of positive tests in Wisconsin have both marched steadily upwards, regularly hitting highs not seen before during the pandemic.
 But that’s not exactly how Evers described the situation. He said Wisconsin was among those with the "highest rate of infection per capita," with no mention that he was only referring to the preceding week.
 And in the longer view, Wisconsin stacks up differently.
 The Times data showed Wisconsin is 30th in cases per capita overall. That’s in line with similar data maintained by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and others. 
 In other words, Wisconsin was in much better shape relative to other states earlier in the pandemic, but not anymore — which was Evers’ underlying point.
 Britt Cudaback, a spokeswoman for Evers, said his statement should be understood as referring to only recent cases by implication, since it was during a discussion of recent trends.
 Our ruling
 In a media briefing on COVID-19, Evers said, "Wisconsin is one of the nine states with the highest rate of infection per capita."
 Evers was discussing how the Wisconsin situation used to be better than most states, but now it’s among the worst. That general point is correct, but his reference isn’t quite right.
 Wisconsin is among the states with the highest rates of new cases, a crucial descriptor that Evers left out of his stat. Without that, Evers’ statement could refer to total cases in Wisconsin, where the state ranks 30th.
 We define Mostly True as a statement that is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. That fits here.
National shortages of masks, gowns and other personal protective equipment have exacerbated concerns that U.S. doctors and nurses are not getting the supplies needed to help COVID-19 patients.
 The surging demand for masks led President Donald Trump to charge, without evidence, that the equipment earmarked for New York’s hospitals has been "going out the back door." But some people are pointing the blame back at Trump, who downplayed the threat of the virus early on despite warnings from experts about the health care system’s readiness. 
 One claim we’ve heard from politicians, TV commentators and social media users is that the U.S. gave away medical supplies that are now sorely needed at home.
 "On February 7, the (World Health Organization) warned about the limited stock of PPE," said a March 31 Facebook post, using an acronym for personal protective equipment. "That same day, the Trump administration announced it was sending 18 tons of masks, gowns and respirators to China. Now our health care workers are dying because of no PPE."
 The post from Blue Dem Warriors was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat potential false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) In this case, the information is largely accurate.
 The State Department announced on Feb. 7 that it had "facilitated the transportation of nearly 17.8 tons of donated medical supplies to the Chinese people, including masks, gowns, gauze, respirators, and other vital materials."
 The Facebook post cited as its source of information a CNN editorial criticizing the shipment.
 The move came more than two weeks after the first U.S. coronavirus case was detected in Washington state on Jan. 21. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo tweeted Feb. 7 that the delivery would "help save lives" in China, which had reported more than 31,000 cases by then. 
 We have coordinated with U.S. organizations to transport more humanitarian relief to people in Wuhan. Personal protective equipment and other medical supplies donated by these organizations can help save lives in #China and help protect people from the #coronavirus. pic.twitter.com/57SN2TXfLP— Secretary Pompeo (@SecPompeo) February 7, 2020 
 Pompeo touted the assistance again in remarks to reporters on March 31, saying it was an example of American generosity and part of an effort to keep the virus contained to China.
 The materials sent to China, Pompeo said, were donated by Samaritan’s Purse, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and other private organizations. Boeing and Intermountain Healthcare were also involved, according to a Feb. 15 State Department press release.
 On Feb. 7, the State Department also pledged to commit up to $100 million in existing funds to assist China and other countries. A State Department spokesperson told us the $100 million promise has been fulfilled with funds from the U.S. Agency for International Development.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tweets
 
 
 stated on November 9, 2021 in a tweet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Bill Gates just admitted that the Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccines don’t work well."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 17, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The U.S. aid to date also includes about $110 million in humanitarian assistance for up to 64 different countries and roughly $64 million in refugee-related assistance for the United Nations. 
 The spokesperson told us the security and health of Americans comes first, but that "the spread of COVID-19 is a threat to our shared international security" and that efforts aimed at responding to the virus abroad are also meant to help mitigate the spread in the U.S. 
 We won’t weigh in on whether the distribution of donated protective equipment to China was the right move. But the Facebook post is correct that the U.S. announced the delivery in February. Other fact-checkers said the same about a similar claim from Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif.
 The Facebook post also notes that the timing of the China shipment coincided with a press conference in which the World Health Organization sounded the alarm about a "limited stock" of personal protective equipment. 
 That’s accurate. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus warned on Feb. 7 of a potential supply shortage across the globe and especially in China. The warning was for the world, not the U.S. in particular.
 "The world is facing severe disruption in the market for personal protective equipment," Ghebreyesus said. "Demand is up to 100 times higher than normal and prices are up to 20 times higher."
 Ghebreyesus said the situation was made worse by people outside of patient care using masks, for example. He said health workers and caretakers should be first to receive items from the limited stock, and that health workers in China needed "the bulk of PPE supplies."
 "WHO discourages stockpiling of (personal protective equipment) in countries and areas where transmission is low," he said.
 The Facebook post closes by saying "our health care workers are dying because of no PPE." 
 News reports indicate that some health workers — who are at an increased risk of exposure — are among the more than 200,000 infected Americans and over 4,500 who have died. Doctors and nurses have made shortages known and are tweeting the hashtag #GetMePPE.
 Some medical supplies are now coming into the U.S. from abroad. The White House arranged for the transport of tons of equipment from China, and the New England Patriots recently lent its team plane to pick up 1.2 million N95 masks from China for Massachusetts’ health workers.
 We asked the State Department whether any of the donated materials sent to China in February made their way back to the U.S., and whether the donations would have gone straight to U.S. hospitals had they not been shipped overseas. We didn’t get answers to those questions.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said: "On February 7, the WHO warned about the limited stock of PPE. That same day, the Trump administration announced it was sending 18 tons of masks, gowns and respirators to China."
 The State Department announced the delivery of nearly 18 tons of donated materials on Feb. 7, the same day that the WHO sounded the alarm about the world’s supply of personal protective equipment. The donated materials came from private groups.
 We rate this statement True.
A popular Facebook post claims that some wealthy Republicans and other public figures have benefited from the federal government’s $2 trillion coronavirus relief package.
 The post, which was published July 7 by a page called Feminist News, includes a collage of photos depicting eight public figures. It claims that businesses ranging from Kanye West’s apparel company, Yeezy, to "Devin Nunes’ winery" have received loans through the Paycheck Protection Program.
 
 "All these millionaires got millions (or close to it) in PPP loans while tens of millions of Americans got a bullsh*t $1200 check months ago," reads text in the collage. "This is how a mafia state works. The small inner circle gets rewarded. Everyone else suffers."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) It has been shared more than 50,000 times, and other popular liberal pages have published similar posts.
 
 (Screenshot from Facebook)
 The Paycheck Protection Program is a federal loan initiative to encourage businesses to keep workers on their payrolls during the coronavirus pandemic. The loans are forgivable, meaning some recipients may be able to keep the money. It passed as part of a larger legislative package in late March and was extended by President Donald Trump on July 4. 
 Two days later, the Small Business Administration and the Treasury Department released a dataset with details about the millions of loans awarded to businesses and nonprofits so far. We used that data to take a closer look at the Facebook post.
 The post is correct in saying that some businesses connected to prominent Republicans have received money as part of the program. But in some cases the post oversimplifies their connection to those businesses, and the data do not show that each person personally received "millions (or close to it)."
 Who got what
 Some of the Republicans mentioned in the Facebook post directly benefited from PPP loans. Others own stakes in PPP beneficiary companies or have more indirect relationships.
 The loan database released by the SBA and the Treasury Department does not specify exactly how much money each entity received. Instead, it offers wide ranges.
 We took a look at the database, as well as news reports, to see how each person mentioned in the Facebook post is connected to PPP beneficiaries. (Search the database for yourself here.)
 What the post says: "Kanye West’s company, Yeezy"
 Who got the money: Yeezy LLC
 Prior to a July 8 interview in which he said he is no longer supporting the president, West was one of Trump’s biggest celebrity supporters. According to the PPP loan database, Yeezy received between $2 million and $5 million.
 What the post says: "Jared Kushner’s family"
 Who got the money: Several companies wholly or partially owned by the Kushners
 Several companies connected to the family of the president’s son-in-law benefited from the PPP, according to reports from ProPublica and the Daily Beast. 
 
 
 Observer Holdings LLC, the parent company of Observer Media — which Kushner used to run and is currently owned by his brother-in-law’s investment firm — received between $350,000 and $1 million.
 
 
 A company called Princeton Forrestal LLC — 40%-owned by Kushner relatives, according to a 2018 securities filing analyzed by the Daily Beast — received between $1 million and $2 million.
 
 
 Esplanade Livingston LLC, a company connected to the Kushners, received between $350,000 and $1 million.
 
 
 The Joseph Kushner Hebrew Academy in Livingston, N.J., received between $1 million and $2 million. It was named after Kushner’s grandfather and is supported by the family.
 
 
 Hollwich Kushner Architecture, a firm headed by Marc Kushner, Jared Kushner’s first cousin, received between $150,000 and $350,000.
 
 
 What the posts: "Mitch McConnell’s wife, Elaine Chao"
 Who got the money: The Foremost Group LLC
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chao is the U.S. transportation secretary. A shipping business run by her family benefited from the PPP. The Foremost Group received between $350,000 and $1 million, according to the loan database. Contrary to what the Facebook post says, Chao herself did not receive a loan.
 The Foremost Group is not listed on Chao’s 2017 financial disclosure, but her relationship with the company has been the subject of a House of Representatives ethics investigation. The Facebook post notes she is married to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.
 What the post says: "Trump’s campaign manager’s company"
 Who got the money: CloudCommerce Inc.
 CloudCommerce, a digital marketing company whose largest shareholder is Brad Parscale, Trump’s campaign manager, received between $350,000 and $1 million from the PPP, according to CBS News and the loan database. 
 Between 2017 and 2018, CloudCommerce acquired several of Parscale’s companies, and he joined the company’s board of directors. On Dec. 10, 2019, Parscale resigned from the board, but he retained his 34.9% stake in CloudCommerce, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing. 
 As of that date, Parscale was not a "director, officer, employee or contractor" of the company, according to the filing. The current chairman and CEO of CloudCommerce is Andrew Van Noy.
 Van Noy told CBS that Parscale "no longer has any involvement in decision-making for the company, including the PPP loan." Neither Parscale Properties LLC, an investment company that Parscale set up with his family, nor Parscale Strategy LLC, a company that was set up by Parscale and has billed millions to the Trump campaign and the Republican National Committee, has received money from the program.
 What the post says: "Trump’s super PAC"
 Who got the money: Companies that have donated to a pro-Trump super PAC
 A pro-Trump super PAC did not receive money from the PPP.
 Vital Pharmaceuticals, the company that owns Bang Energy, was lent between $5 million and $10 million. In 2019, Vital Pharmaceuticals gave $250,000 to America First Action, a pro-Trump super PAC that spent $36 million during the 2018 campaign cycle, according to OpenSecrets.org. Another firm that has donated to the super PAC, G.H. Palmer Associates, received between $350,000 and $1 million, according to the loan database and CNBC.
 Companies connected to other major Trump donors were among the earliest recipients of PPP loans, the Associated Press reported.
 What the post says: Betsy DeVos
 Who got the money: Renaissance Acquisition Co. LLC
 The education secretary herself did not receive a loan, but the Facebook post framed it that way. Bloomberg reported that a company with the same name as one listed on her 2017 financial disclosure report did. Renaissance Acquisition Co., which operates an Indianapolis-based company that provides services to nonprofits, received between $2 million and $5 million, according to the loan database.
 In her financial disclosure, DeVos reported earning $216,600 as a distributive share from Renaissance Acquisition, meaning she is a partial owner or partner in the business.
 What the post says: "Devin Nunes’ winery"
 Who got the money: Phase 2 Cellars LLC and Alpha Omega Winery LLC
 Rep. Nunes, R-Calif., is not the sole owner of Phase 2 Cellars, a vineyard in San Luis Obispo that received between $1 million and $2 million from the PPP. But he is a partial owner, holding between $50,001 and $100,000 in equity in it, according to a Daily Beast analysis of Nunes’ most recent financial disclosure. Alpha Omega Winery, another California vineyard in which Nunes holds equity, received a loan within the same range.
 What the post says: "Rep. Roger Williams, R-Texas"
 Who got the money: JRW Corp.
 JRW Corp., a Fort Worth, Texas, car dealership where Williams serves as the sole director and president, was lent between $1 million and $2 million. His own stake in the company exceeds $50 million, according to Williams’ most recent financial disclosure.
 We reached out to Feminist News for a comment, but we haven’t heard back.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post says eight wealthy public figures received loans as part of the federal Paycheck Protection Program.
 The post correctly characterizes how West, Kushner and Williams are connected to companies that received money. However, it oversimplifies how Chao, Parscale, DeVos and Nunes benefited from the program. 
 The federal government lent millions of dollars to companies connected to, but not wholly owned by, Parscale, Nunes and DeVos. A shipping company owned by Chao’s family received between $350,000 and $1 million, but she did not receive a loan herself, and the company is not listed on her financial disclosure.
 The Facebook post is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. We rate it Half True.
In mid-April, the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control recommended a "pause" in the administration of Johnson & Johnson’s coronavirus vaccine, saying that blood clots in a tiny fraction of cases required further review.
 Ten days later, after completing the safety review, both agencies recommended ending the pause and resuming use of the J&J vaccine. 
 The pause prompted some observers to worry that the federal action could elevate public concern about the safety of the J&J vaccine in particular, and about coronavirus vaccines in general.
 These concerns were heightened by the near-simultaneous slowdown of immunization rates in most states, as the shrinking pool of unvaccinated Americans became more filled with people who were vaccine hesitant.
 On May 9, Jeffrey Zients, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, tried to bolster the notion that the vaccines are safe — claiming that the J&J pause only strengthened that view among the public, rather than undermining it.
 "The research showed ... that confidence overall in the vaccines increased after the pause," Zients said on CNN’s "State of the Union."
 When we looked at polling data, we found some evidence to support Zients’ view but also found survey results that suggest damage has been done to the public’s view of J&J’s vaccine in particular, and perhaps to the others. The picture is more mixed than either solely positive or negative.
 Evidence backing up Zients’ assertion
 One piece of evidence that supports Zients’ case comes from a survey sponsored by the de Beaumont Foundation and conducted by pollster Frank Luntz.
 The survey, which was taken a few days after the pause was announced, found that overall, 40% of respondents said they were more likely to get one of the vaccines than they had been a month before.
 Meanwhile, weekly polls by YouGov for The Economist have shown slightly declining hesitancy about getting vaccinated since before the pause began. In the poll taken from April 3 to April 6, prior to the pause, 40% of respondents either said they wouldn’t get vaccinated or weren’t sure about getting vaccinated. In the subsequent four polls, that number was 41%, 35%, 33%, and 32%, with the final poll taken between May 1 and May 4.
 Another poll, sponsored by the media outlet Axios and conducted by the research firm Ipsos, found no evidence of wider vaccine hesitancy after the pause was announced.
 The Axios poll, which was taken several days after the de Beaumont poll, found that 20% of respondents said they were "not at all likely" to get the vaccine as soon as it was available to them. That percentage has shown little change since it was asked in early January 2021.
 Another data point suggests that Americans felt comfortable with the pause. The Axios poll found that 91% of respondents were aware of the pause, and that of those, 88% said it was a responsible decision. (When we asked the White House for support for Zients’ statement, a spokesperson directed PolitiFact to both the de Beaumont and Axios polls.)
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Finally, some polling evidence suggests that while J&J’s vaccine was hit by a decline in confidence, the two other vaccines used in the United States, one produced by Pfizer and BioNTech and the other by Moderna, were spared.
 On the one hand, the Economist/YouGov poll, which surveyed Americans both before and after the pause began, found confidence in the J&J vaccine declining after the pause. Among respondents who answered before the pause was announced, 52% considered it to be "very safe" or "somewhat safe." That fell to 37% for respondents who answered after the pause was made public.
 Yet that decline was not mirrored in their view of Pfizer and Moderna. For both those vaccines, nearly 60% of respondents said they believed they were safe — numbers that were essentially unchanged from prior surveys.
 Another poll, by Dynata for CNBC, showed similar results. 
 The first choice brand for respondents was Pfizer, at 35%, followed by Moderna and J&J at 17% each. That result marked a significant dropoff for J&J compared with the previous month’s version of the poll, which found that the J&J vaccine — which unlike the other two can be taken in a single shot — had been the favorite of 29%. The Pfizer and Moderna vaccines, by contrast, both increased their share on this question.
 Other polling shows some caveats
 The strongest evidence against Zients’ assertion comes from a poll taken by the Kaiser Family Foundation in the second half of April. 
 Among those who said they were not yet convinced they should get the vaccine right away, 81% reported that they worried about serious side effects from the vaccine — an increase from 70% the prior month. For women, who accounted for the bulk of the reports of blood clots among J&J recipients, concern increased even more. The share with those concerns rose 15 percentage points, from 77% in March to 92% in April.
 Meanwhile, other surveys mirrored the YouGov poll’s finding that public concern about the safety of J&J’s vaccine was higher than for either Pfizer or Moderna.
 The Kaiser poll found that 46% believed the J&J vaccine was safe, far below the 69% who said the same for both Pfizer and Moderna. This sentiment was even more pronounced among respondents who told Kaiser they would "wait and see" about whether to get a vaccination — essentially, the group of "vaccine hesitant" Americans. Among these respondents, more than half said they thought Pfizer and Moderna were safe, compared with just 28% who said they believed J&J was safe.
 The ABC News-Washington Post poll found similar discrepancies by brand. After the pause, slightly fewer than half of respondents considered the J&J vaccine to be "very" or "somewhat" safe, compared with better than 7 in 10 respondents for two rival vaccines. And among respondents who were not yet immunized, J&J’s reputation was even worse — fewer than one-third said it was safe.
 Our ruling
 Zients said "the research showed … that confidence overall in the vaccines increased after the pause" to review the safety of Johnson & Johnson’s coronavirus vaccine.
 There is evidence to support his assertion. A de Beaumont Foundation poll found greater enthusiasm to get a vaccination after the pause; YouGov polls show slightly declining hesitancy; and an Axios/Ipsos poll found no softening of interest in getting a vaccination despite the pause.
 However, there’s also evidence that the pause worried Americans. A Kaiser Family Foundation survey found rising concerns about side effects after the pause was announced. And polls by Kaiser, YouGov and ABC and the Washington Post found low and — after the pause was announced — worsening trust of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, even if that did not spill over into sentiments about the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines.
 We rate the statement Half True.
Endorsing his former vice president, Joe Biden, to win the White House, former President Barack Obama sought to contrast the 2020 platforms of Democrats and Republicans on a critical plank: their stance on the Affordable Care Act. It’s a difference, he argued, that has assumed newfound urgency.
 "The Republicans occupying the White House and running the Senate … have shown themselves willing to cut millions off their health insurance and eliminate preexisting condition protections for millions more, even in the middle of this public health crisis," Obama said.
 Obama was referring to a couple of GOP policies, the former president’s senior adviser Eric Schultz told KHN. The first: a pending Supreme Court case, Texas v. Azar, in which the Trump administration has argued the 2010 health law should be struck down. Schultz also highlighted the White House’s refusal to provide a special open enrollment period for the ACA health exchanges in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic.
 We’ve previously checked claims about President Donald Trump’s stance on the law’s preexisting condition protections — arguably its most popular component ― and his position on the Texas v. Azar lawsuit.
 But COVID-19 adds new relevance, because of both the virus’s devastating health implications and bludgeoning impact on the American economy. Indeed, the Trump administration’s handling of the virus crisis is shaping up to be a defining issue in the run-up to November. Meanwhile, Biden made the health care law a signature component of his presidential platform and has been a vocal critic of the administration’s pandemic response.
 With that in mind, we decided to take another look.
 The Republican agenda
 Obama is correct: The Republican Party has opposed the ACA for years. In 2016, then-candidate Trump campaigned on its repeal. Since then, the White House and congressional Republicans have pursued an agenda that would dismantle the law’s preexisting condition protections. Republicans haven’t united behind an alternative plan, either.
 First: the lawsuit. Texas v. Azar stems from the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. That measure took the teeth out of the health law’s individual mandate, which required that all Americans have health insurance or pay a penalty. The tax law, pushed by Republicans and signed by Trump, set that penalty to $0.
 A collection of Republican states’ attorneys general now argue that, without the penalty, the rest of the health law doesn’t work and should be struck down.
 Killing the ACA would eliminate the stipulation that insurance plans cannot charge people more if they have a preexisting condition, get rid of the subsidies it provides for people to buy insurance on the exchanges and gut the Medicaid expansion that, in six years, directly extended coverage to more than 13 million people. The Supreme Court has agreed to hear the case, although it won’t rule until after the November election.
 The Trump administration, while technically in the position that would defend the law in court, has declined to support it — a move legal experts say is almost unprecedented. In fact, the administration has even sided with the states arguing that it should be struck down. Neither the White House nor Senate Republicans have put forth a replacement bill that would maintain the ACA’s protections in the event the high court rules against the law.
 We asked the White House if the administration had changed its stance in the wake of the pandemic. Trump’s staff redirected us to the Justice Department, the federal government’s legal arm. The department did not respond to emailed requests for comment. As recently as the end of March, though, Trump told reporters he still wanted the law "terminated."
 Senate Democrats have pushed the administration to change its position on the lawsuit. But Republicans, who hold the Senate majority, have been silent, a position that hasn’t changed even since COVID-19 effectively shut down large swaths of the country.
 In some ways, the Republican stance isn’t important, argued Thomas Miller, a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a public policy think tank. It’s hard to imagine the Supreme Court voting to get rid of the health law, especially in the midst of COVID-19, he said.
 Still, that doesn’t change the facts of what Trump is arguing.
 And the lawsuit is also only one part of the equation. Another, is healthcare.gov.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Americans who have lost their jobs ― and, often, the insurance that came with it — are eligible to buy insurance on the federal exchange, since job loss is a "qualifying life event" that gets you special access. Those who otherwise lack coverage would normally have to wait until the regular open enrollment period, which takes place at the end of the year. But the threat of COVID-19 has changed the risk for many of these potential shoppers.
 In response, 11 states have independently reopened their state-run health exchanges for a special sign-up period. But the administration has declined to take such steps for the national marketplace.
 "If you have been uninsured and picked up your newspaper, or turned on your news and realized your health was in much greater risk than you had anticipated, and would like to rush and get health insurance in case you end up on a ventilator ― you’re out of luck," said Linda Blumberg, a health policy fellow at the Urban Institute, a nonprofit research organization.
 Even before coronavirus, the institute estimated that 32 million Americans were uninsured. About 20 million of them could benefit from a special enrollment period, Blumberg said. Without insurance, coronavirus treatment poses not just a health risk, but also a financial one.
 The Trump administration has said it will pay hospitals directly, out of a pool of $100 billion, to cover the cost of treating uninsured people with COVD-19. After treating patients, hospitals would get paid at the Medicare rate.
 But the administration’s policy extends only to covering COVID-19 treatment. Uninsured people with underlying chronic conditions don’t have a way to pay for health care, noted Robert Berenson, another Urban Institute fellow. If left untreated, those chronic ailments make COVID-19 far more dangerous than it would be for someone able to get preventive treatment earlier on.
 Coronavirus and the ACA
 President Trump’s stance raises another question, experts noted. Without the ACA, what kind of impact would COVID-19 have?
 Even with the heath law intact, many Americans won’t be able to find affordable health insurance. That particularly applies to people who can’t afford the premiums on the individual marketplace, don’t qualify for federal subsidies or live in one of the 14 states that didn’t opt into the ACA’s Medicaid expansion provision.
 And the ACA is nowhere near sufficient on its own, Miller noted. Having insurance is part of the picture, but it doesn’t guarantee access to testing or that a hospital will be able to treat you. "On the margins, it does help a little bit to have insurance coverage, but the problem is so much larger than that," Miller argued.
 Still, without the health law, the virus’s impact would be "catastrophic," said Jonathan Oberlander, a health policy professor at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill.
 Striking the individual marketplace and Medicaid expansion would leave almost another 20 million people uninsured — "at risk for not only illness from COVID-19, but also massive medical bills," said Larry Levitt, a vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation. (KHN is an editorially independent program of the foundation.)
 Without the ACA, COVID-19 could be considered a preexisting condition. Insurance companies could charge more to cover people who have previously contracted the virus (assuming, of course, those people can get tested and recorded as having had COVID-19). Plus, emerging evidence suggests severe cases of COVID-19 may leave lingering health consequences, that even after recovery would require ongoing medical care, Levitt said.
 "The ACA’s consumer protections ensure that persons with COVID-19 can obtain insurance without fear of being turned away or charged exorbitant premiums because of their preexisting condition," Oberlander said.
 The health law also imposed strict regulations over what insurance must cover. Without those regulations, plans could ― and likely would — revert to skimpier coverage, Blumberg said.
 That, she said, means plans that perhaps don’t cover ventilators or branded medicines, or that cap how many days of hospital care they’ll cover, or that require people to pay much more out-of-pocket.
 "Insurers, given the legal ability to do it, would limit their legal liability and protect themselves from high claims," she said. "They did it before and will do it again."
 Our ruling
 Obama accused the Trump administration and Senate Republicans of being "willing to cut millions off their health insurance and eliminate preexisting condition protections for millions more, even in the middle of this public health crisis."
 Evidence indicates that this is an apt characterization. None have put forth a plan that would maintain coverage or consumer protections ― policies that benefit millions of Americans — if the Supreme Court rules against the ACA. And as Obama asserts, striking down the law without an equivalent replacement could be devastating, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. We rate this claim True.
A Facebook post claimed that a difference in leadership explains why the United States has so many more COVID-19 deaths than Canada.
 "It’s not that there’s a virus shield between Canada (4,500 deaths) and the U.S. (80,000 deaths)," the post said. "What exists is a difference in leadership."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The United States has experienced more confirmed COVID-19 deaths than Canada. But when taking into account the larger population of the U.S., the gap is not nearly as large as the post claims.
 While experts say leadership is one factor affecting coronavirus mortality, other factors are in play as well.
 Comparing the numbers
 The raw numbers come from Our World in Data. That research organization is funded by philanthropists Bill and Melinda Gates and is led by Max Roser, director of the Oxford Martin Programme on Global Development at the University of Oxford.
 As of May 9, the date of the post, the confirmed COVID-19 death toll was 4,569 for Canada and 77,180 for the U.S., or nearly 17 times as many.
 But the United States has a much larger population. To account for that, Our World in Data also reports the number of COVID-19 deaths per million people as of May 9: 121.06 for Canada and 233.17 for the United States.
 So adjusted for population, the U.S. death toll is not quite double Canada’s.
 The U.S. leads the world in overall COVID-19 deaths. On a per-capita basis, it fares better than some countries, but worse than others.
 The U.S. is showing a lower number of deaths per capita than countries such as Spain and Italy. But despite claims by President Donald Trump, it has far more than Germany and many other countries, including Canada, South Korea, Iran, Russia, Poland and Switzerland.
 But comparing numbers at a particular point in time "can be very misleading in terms of conclusions — because trajectories over time and the levels at different points in time are very different," said health economist Peter Berman, director of the School of Population and Public Health at the University of British Columbia and adjunct professor in global health at Harvard University. 
 "Canada and the U.S. are not too far apart today, but the U.S. was way higher than Canada some weeks ago," he said.
 Differences in leadership
 The post does not define what it means by "leadership," but there are differences in the ways the two countries’ governments responded to the outbreak.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At the federal level, Canada supported widespread testing early and the U.S. did not, said Joshua Michaud, associate director of global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation. "That has been one of the big weaknesses of the U.S. response. It took us a very long time to scale up testing in the United States.
 "Provinces in Canada have generally coordinated well with the federal government on how to respond to the outbreak, whereas U.S. states have often taken their own paths and sometimes clashed with the federal government," said Michaud, a former infectious-disease epidemiologist. "That has not helped the response in the United States, if you have that sort of tension."
 Berman said public-health officers in Canada are much more empowered legally, and medical care is largely under the same government authority as public health, so it is much easier to direct and coordinate a response. 
 Canada’s politicians, he said, "tended to cede the podium to the public-health scientists more and didn’t undermine or question them, especially in public. In the U.S., political leaders disagreed with scientists often and publicly.
 With the U.S. in an election cycle, Berman added, "political opposition is looking for things to criticize, as is a politically polarized media. Also, the U.S. seems to me to be a more polarized society politically. All of this has different results in terms of coherence and coordination of policy response."
 News reports have also looked at differences in leadership.
 An analysis by the CBC, the Canadian broadcast network, said Trump gave mixed messages about social distancing, and one American study found that people in counties that voted predominantly for Trump in 2016 were less likely to perceive risk associated with coronavirus, seek information or practice physical distancing, the analysis noted. In contrast, according to the analysis, Canadian politicians were more consistent in their messaging, and tracking data collected by Google from smartphones suggested that Canadians practiced more physical distancing than Americans and began doing it earlier. 
 In addition to citing Trump’s mixed messaging, the CBC analysis said the U.S. death rate is higher because its largest city, New York, was struck early in the pandemic; and because a lack of health insurance is a problem in the U.S., especially among Americans more vulnerable to COVID-19, such as African Americans.
 "Canada has universal health care, whereas many people in the United States do not have health insurance or easy access to care, Michaud said. And, he said, the U.S. has a "fractured" health care system, with government providers, health insurance companies and private practitioners "competing for scarce resources."
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post claimed: "It’s not that there’s a virus shield between Canada (4,500 deaths) and the U.S. (80,000 deaths). What exists, is a difference in leadership."
 These numbers aren’t directly comparable because the U.S. has a far larger population, so the post exaggerates the difference. 
 But on a per-capita basis, the United States still has nearly twice as many COVID-19 deaths as Canada does. 
 Experts said differences in how political leadership responded to the disease are one factor in the disparity. But there are others, such as the virus’ heavy impact on New York City; poor access to health insurance and health care among people more vulnerable to the coronavirus; and people’s different responses to guidelines aimed at containing the virus.
 The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details.
 We rate it Half True.
In wide-ranging recent comments criticizing President Donald Trump, Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden touched on a topic that hits home in Wisconsin — struggling farms.
 Speaking in Manitowoc on Sept. 21, 2020, Biden said Trump started a trade war that "led to a surge in farm bankruptcies."
 To be sure, times are tough for Wisconsin farmers, particularly in dairy. 
 In 2019 alone, Wisconsin lost 818 dairy farms, part of an accelerating decline in which about one-quarter of the state’s dairy farms have gone out of business since 2014.
 But amid such a long-running trend, is it fair to put the onus for a "surge" on Trump’s trade wars?
 Let’s dig in.
 The trade wars took a toll
 Campaigning as a dealmaker in 2016, Trump promised to renegotiate U.S. trade deals in America’s favor, and once in office he imposed tariffs seeking to achieve that end.
 Many countries — including China, Canada, Mexico — as well as the European Union retaliated with tariffs of their own that struck U.S. agricultural products.
 Between July 2018 and August 2019, for example, the Brookings Institution reported the U.S. announced tariffs on more than $550 billion in Chinese products, and China retaliated with tariffs on more than $185 billion on U.S. products. U.S. producers were doubly hit since numerous studies showed the U.S. companies primarily paid for the U.S. tariffs.
 The toll on farmers was heavy enough the federal government created the Market Facilitation Program, which paid out more than $14 billion to farmers in 2018 and 2019 to mitigate the impact of the trade wars.
 Farm bankruptcies rose
 Amid this environment, farm bankruptcies did rise in 2019 — the point where you’d expect to see a spike given the trade battles occurring at the time.
 That year, 595 family farmers filed for Chapter 12 bankruptcies nationwide, up from 498 filings a year earlier, Reuters and others reported. Chapter 12 is a bankruptcy code created during the 1980s farm crisis to allow family farmers and small fishing operations to keep operating while they work out plans to repay lenders.
 Wisconsin led the nation with 57 bankruptcy filings, 16 more than any other state.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But experts say you can’t draw a dark line between the trade wars and the rise in bankruptcies.
 Though the jump from 2018 to 2019 was the largest in recent years, bankruptcies have been rising for a while.
 After Chapter 12 bankruptcies dropped from 723 in 2010 to 361 in 2014, the number has steadily grown since.
 
 Farm bankruptcies did drop slightly in the first half of 2020 — the total of 284 was down 10 from the same period in 2019 — but that was "due in large part" to government payments made to farmers as part of the Coronavirus Food Assistance Program, according to the American Farm Bureau Federation.
 RELATED: Dems exaggerate in slamming Trump farm bailouts as "handout for large agricultural companies"
 In addition, trade wars are far from the only factor at play for farmers in Wisconsin and nationwide.
 Reuters described it this way:
 The increase in (2019 bankruptcies) had been somewhat expected, bankruptcy experts and agricultural economists said, as farmers face trade battles, ever-mounting farm debt, prolonged low commodity prices, volatile weather patterns and a fatal pig disease that has decimated China’s herd.
 John Newton, chief economist at the Farm Bureau, cited many of the same factors in an interview with PolitiFact Wisconsin.
 "The farm bankruptcies are a function of not only retaliatory tariffs on U.S. agriculture by China, but also years of low commodity prices created by a global economic slowdown and large supplies of grains, oilseeds and livestock products internationally and recent natural disasters," Newton said in an email. "I don’t think you can lay the blame of higher farm bankruptcies on the retaliatory tariffs alone."
 Our ruling
 Speaking in Manitowoc, Biden said Trump started a trade war that "led to a surge in farm bankruptcies."
 The trade wars have indeed hit farmers hard. And bankruptcies rose at the height of the trade wars, increasing more than they had in the four prior years.
 But this claim oversimplifies by listing the trade wars alone as being responsible for that increase.
 We define Half True as a statement that is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. That fits here.
 This fact check is available at IFCN’s 2020 US Elections FactChat #Chatbot on WhatsApp. Click here, for more.
At the Republican National Convention, President Donald Trump cast himself as a stalwart friend of police and an effective leader in the fight against COVID-19.
 In a speech in Pittsburgh, Democratic nominee Joe Biden said Trump was neither.
 "Do you feel safer under Donald Trump?" Biden asked Aug. 31. "More cops have died from COVID this year than have been killed on patrol."
 That stat raised eyebrows, and we checked to see if it was true. Biden didn’t say exactly what the best data show, but the comparison is largely accurate.
 Tallies of deaths by two national groups show that COVID-19 has killed more law enforcement officers than gunfire and other hazards of the job in 2020. The caveat to Biden’s claim is there is some statistical fuzziness regarding who is a cop and what it means to be on patrol. 
 Roughly one-third of these tallies include corrections and detention center officers who work inside institutions where the virus can spread more readily. Some Customs and Border Protection field officers and other first responders are also included. While these occupations are counted as part of law enforcement, they might not come to mind as the cops that Biden referred to. 
 The COVID-19 death toll is still the greatest single cause of death when those occupations are excluded.
 What the broad numbers show
 The National Law Enforcement Officer Memorial Fund lists 101 dead officers from COVID-19 compared with 87 from anything else, including gunfire, car accidents or other causes. If it weren’t for COVID-19, officer deaths were on track to be lower this year than last.
 The National Law Enforcement Officer Memorial Fund says on its website that before it adds an officer to its list of deaths due to the virus, "substantive evidence will be required to show the death was more than likely due to the direct and proximate result of" exposure in the line of duty.
 Another source, the Officer Down Memorial Page, shows 101 deaths from COVID-19 and 81 deaths from all other causes. Communications director Jessica Rushing said the count is updated daily.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (The Fraternal Order of Police has tracked 208 deaths from COVID-19, but not fatalities from other causes. It notes that it doesn’t verify the COVID-19 deaths.)
 
 According to Rushing’s group, gunfire is the second most common cause of death. 
 
 By a factor of three, COVID-19 is the leading cause of death for the broad group of officers.
 That has as much to do with the pattern of police fatalities as it does with the virus, said Rutgers criminologist Frank Edwards. Deaths in the line of duty due to any cause tend to average about eight each month. 
 FBI data on deaths in the line of duty further back this point. The FBI numbers distinguish between accidental and felonious deaths of officers in the community. They show that in a typical month, criminal acts kill less than five officers a month.
 Excluding the corrections and detention officers, the toll from COVID-19 remains at about 70 in the Officer Down count — still double the loss of life due to gunfire, but not higher than the sum of other causes of death.
 Our ruling
 Biden said that more cops have died from COVID-19 than while on patrol.
 COVID-19 by itself has killed more law enforcement officers than all other causes combined, according to two groups that track these numbers.
 No matter how we parsed the data — by excluding correctional and detention center officers, or by focusing on felonious deaths to officers that could be considered "on patrol" — COVID-19 posed the greatest single threat to officers’ lives.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
Del. Nick Freitas, R-Culpeper, says Democrats in the General Assembly have opened prison gates for the early release of thousands of violent felons.
 "VA Democrats authorized for early release over 4,000 violent felons, 60% of which are incarcerated for violent offenses," he posted on his Facebook page on April 28. 
 Freitas repeated the charge that day at a virtual town hall meeting, laying the blame on Democratic Gov. Ralph Northam. "There was one governor’s recommendation that came down where he was advocating for the option of early release for over 4,000 people that have been incarcerated," he said. "Sixty percent of the people that he was advocating be eligible for the program were actually incarcerated for violent offenses."
 . We fact-checked the statements by Freitas, who is seeking the Republican nomination for the Seventh District congressional seat held by Democrat Abigail Spanberger.
 His statements are based on a budget amendment the Democratic-led General Assembly approved on April 22 at Northam’s request. Concerned about the spread of COVID-19 in state prisons, Northam asked the legislature to allow the Department of Corrections to release inmates with less than a year left on their sentences. The emergency leniency does not apply to inmates convicted of capital murder or sexually violent crimes.
 Freitas did not respond to three requests we made for his source on the number of inmates who would become eligible for early release and the percentage who had committed violent crimes. His information likely came from Del. Robert Bell, R-Albemarle, who got data from the Department of Corrections and shared it with colleagues.
 Numbers
 The department said 4,618 inmates will enter the last year of their sentences by April 30, 2021. Of them, 2,933 - or 64% - are considered violent offenders under parole abolition laws passed by the General Assembly in 1995. 
 We’ll subtract 172 inmates convicted of sexual crimes and ineligible to go early. That leaves 4,446 inmates who would be eligible for early release. Of them, 2,761 inmates - or 62% - are legally classified as violent offenders. Among their ranks:
 
 
 3 were convicted of second degree murder;
 
 
 65 of manslaughter; 
 
 
 102 of kidnapping; and
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NYS Department of Corrections and Community Supervision
 
 
 stated on November 8, 2021 in a news release
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New York is "leading the nation with the lowest imprisonment rate of any large state”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Jill Terreri Ramos • November 19, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1,386 of assault or robbery. 
 
 
 The Department of Corrections uses a more lenient definition of violent crimes for sorting inmates. Under its terms, the offenses of inmates who could be freed early breaks down this way:
 
 
 1,928 committed violent crimes, or 42%;
 
 
 1,606 committed property crimes, or 35%;
 
 
 1,080 convicted of drug-related or public order crimes, or 23%; and
 
 
 4 inmates’ who are unclassified. 
 
 
 Not all eligible inmates will get out early. The DOC says each eligible person will be screened. Among other things, the department will consider an inmate’s crime, health, conduct in prison, recidivism risk and plans for work and shelter if released. As of May 18, 195 people have been freed early.
 DOC statistics show as of May 19, 900 inmates and 73 prison employees have tested positive for COVID-19. Five inmates have died from the virus.
 Freitas, during his town hall podcast said he and other GOP lawmakers are open to an emergency early release of people convicted of "minor crimes," but not violent offenders.
 Our ruling
 Freitas says, "VA Democrats authorized for early release over 4,000 inmates, 60% of which are incarcerated for violent offenses." He’s talking about a budget amendment the Democratic-run legislature muscled through at Northam’s request to combat a COVID-19 outbreak in prisons.
 Freitas’ numbers are good, but his statement lacks context. He didn’t mention - in his Facebook post or during his town hall broadcast - that all of these inmates will be less than a year away from finishing their sentence. They’ll getting out soon anyway, regardless of whether they’re granted early release.
 So we rate his statement Mostly True.
Social media accounts popular with conservatives are claiming that a clip of lawmakers at a recent White House event shows "Dems caught not wearing masks."
 "It’s not about your health," says the text on the video, which was shared widely on Instagram, including by One America News Network, a pro-Trump outlet. "It’s about control."
 Instagram posts sharing the video were flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 
 The video, made from a 12-second clip posted by the Recount, shows Sen. Raphael Warnock, D-Ga., House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., Attorney General Merrick Garland and other politicians mingling in the White House. The group gathered as President Joe Biden signed into law a bill meant to address the rise in hate crimes against Asian Americans during the pandemic.
 
 President Joe Biden smiles after signing the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act in the East Room of the White House on May 20, 2021, in Washington. (AP)
 The video is missing critical context: The Democrats present were acting in accordance with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s recently updated guidance for fully vaccinated Americans, which as of May 13 said vaccinated people could gather indoors without masks and without physically distancing. The people in the video were not "caught" violating any mask mandate.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Fully vaccinated people no longer need to wear a mask or physically distance in any setting, except where required by federal, state, local, tribal, or territorial laws, rules, and regulations, including local business and workplace guidance," the agency said.
 The White House emailed staff the day the guidance was updated to say that those who were fully vaccinated would no longer be required to wear masks, according to reports. CNN reported soon after that 100% of Democratic lawmakers in the House and Senate had been vaccinated.
 The crowd at Biden’s event also included Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, who co-wrote the legislation, and whom Biden thanked in his remarks. 
 "The nicest part is being able to shake hands again and to see people's smiles," Collins said.
 The Wall Street Journal reported that the event was open to 68 seated guests, plus a few dozen staff and journalists. Fact-checkers at Lead Stories and the Dispatch also determined that the video saying Democrats at the event were "caught not wearing masks" was missing context.
 The Instagram posts are partially accurate — the Democrats were together without masks — but the videos also leave out important details and take things out of context. The Democrats were acting in line with the CDC’s guidelines and White House policies for fully vaccinated individuals.
 We rate this post Half True.
Has the coronavirus pandemic also sent drug overdoses soaring? That’s what Rep. Carol Miller, R-W.Va., said in a July 30 tweet.
 Miller tweeted, "In West Virginia alone, overdoses have increased by 50% during the #COVID-19 pandemic. We must stop the illegal drug flow across our Southern Border. That’s why I added an amendment to 2021 government funding to #BuildTheWall. Sadly, House Democrats voted this down."
 We’ve previously rated Mostly True the statement by fellow West Virginia Republican Rep. David McKinney that "$53 million a week is coming across the border in drugs." We’ve also rated True the statement that West Virginia has the highest overdose rate of any state.
 In this article, we’ll focus on Miller’s assertion that the pandemic and the economic dislocation that has followed have driven an increasing number of overdoses in West Virginia.
 We found evidence in two West Virginia media reports published not long before Miller’s tweet that supports the idea that the state has seen a rise in overdoses since the pandemic.
 In late June, the Charleston Gazette-Mail reported on increases in overdoses. West Virginia Public Broadcasting did so in early July. (Both outlets are PolitiFact West Virginia partners.)
 Both news reports cited data from the West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources showing that emergency responses for suspected overdoses had increased by close to 50%. At the time of those reports, the agency had recorded 923 emergency responses for May 2020, compared with 650 in May 2019. That was a 42% increase.
 The article also reported a more than fivefold increase for June in average weekly overdoses that are reversed by naloxone, a medication used to rapidly reverse opioid overdoses. Overdoses reversed by naloxone averaged 16 per week in June 2020, compared with norms of three per week and 12 per month, according to the article. 
 Miller’s office referenced the articles when we inquired, but because the articles had appeared several weeks before Miller’s tweet, we looked for state Health Department data that was available closer to the date of her statement. The data for each month are updated on the 15th day of the following month, Allison Adler, the department’s director of communications, told PolitiFact, but the updates could include some earlier months.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Counting all the updates made as of Aug. 15, the number of overdoses in April 2020 held steady compared with the previous year, but the numbers did spike in May and June. Emergency response for suspected overdoses increased by 64% in May and 30% in June. 
 So for the three months combined, the number increased by 33% from a year earlier, but during May and June alone, the numbers rose by 47%, which is close to Miller’s figure. July numbers were on par with those in 2019, but Miller wouldn’t have known about that data point when she sent her tweet.
 
 
 The department also offers another metric: emergency room visits related to overdoses. These increased by 12% in May and June compared to the year prior. (It would later rise by 28% in July.)
 This pattern has been echoed elsewhere in the United States. 
 The New York Times has reported that drug overdose deaths rose to record numbers in 2019, and are already 13% higher than average in 2020, according to mortality data from local and state governments covering 40% of the U.S. population. The Association of American Medical Colleges also reported that suspected drug overdoses rose 18% from mid-March through May, which would be consistent with the notion that the pandemic is pushing overdoses higher. 
 Our ruling 
 Miller said, "In West Virginia alone, overdoses have increased by 50% during the #COVID-19 pandemic."
 For the three months from April through June, EMS responses rose by 33%. Looking just at May and June, the increase was 47%. 
 We rate her statement Mostly True.
Texas’ oil and gas sector took a tumble in 2020 when the coronavirus pandemic was compounded by a Saudi Arabia-Russia price war that further devastated the global oil market. 
 In May, two weeks after crude oil prices turned negative for the first time in history, Texas Railroad Commissioner Christi Craddick spoke with the Texas Tribune giving updates on how the industry was handling the downturn.
 "Last year, [oil and gas] was about 35% of the state's economy ... and so [because this industry] is down ... it's gonna affect everything," Craddick said.
 Craddick repeated that same figure in a tweet earlier this month as she advocated for prioritization of the Railroad Commission — the state’s oil and gas regulatory agency — in next year’s state budget. 
 "Oil and gas is 35 percent of the state economy, making the (Texas Railroad Commission’s) budget an important priority," she said.
 Texas oil and gas producers have suffered the double blow of COVID-19 and the global price shock amid an era when the industry is facing a process of structural contraction. Oil and gas has long been a primary driver of Texas’ prosperity, but does its share of the state economy remain at 35% even after a historically tumultuous year?
 Three tiers of economic analysis
 Determining the oil and gas’ industry’s share of the state economy "is a hard number to pin down," said Jesse Thompson, senior business economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
 There’s a multitude of ways an industry’s economic impact can be measured, Thompson said. Impact could be an industry’s share of a state’s gross state product, or the number of jobs it creates, or the amount of income it generates, or some combination of the three. 
 Furthermore, there are three different levels upon which economists analyze economic impact: an industry’s direct, indirect and induced effects on the economy. Direct effects include the revenue generated by oil and gas companies; indirect effects include the businesses supplying equipment or services to those oil and gas companies; and induced effects include the spending of people in the industry as a result of increased personal income. 
 For example, induced impacts could include an interior decorator in Houston who is hired by an oil and gas employee.
 "There’s a lot of very reasonable ways to break this up, that’s why there’s not necessarily a right answer," Thompson said.
 Direct impacts are the most straightforward measurement. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, a federal agency, the oil and gas sector directly comprised around 15% of the state’s gross state product between 2019 and early 2020. That share fell to around 14.2% as the coronavirus swept the globe and forced the industry to shed jobs and shut down drilling rigs in the second quarter of 2020, the latest period for which economic data is available.
 According to Craddick’s spokesperson, the 35% figure Craddick cited represents the oil and gas sector’s direct impacts to the gross state product combined with its indirect and induced impacts. The 35% figure is also a projection for how the year will end after the industry’s bounce back from its April nadir. 
 "We have seen improvements throughout the remainder of the year, so the number is definitely going to land somewhere between 30% and 40%, so 35% was an easy middle point," said Craddick’s Director of Public Affairs Mia Hutchens. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Certain indicators are already showing the sector’s recovery. The Texas rig count has shown a slight uptick since October corresponding with an improving global demand for oil and natural gas. After nearly 60,000 oil workers lost their jobs between February and August, around 2,100 jobs were added in September and October, according to the Texas Independent Producers and Royalty Owners Association. The association also projects that, by year's end, the industry will be supporting at least 300,000 direct jobs and 2.1 million indirect jobs in Texas.
 The 35% projection was calculated using data from the Texas comptrollers office, the Texas Pipeline Association and the Texas Oil and Gas Association, the sector’s largest industry group in the state, according to Hutchens. 
 At the beginning of 2020, before COVID-19 had reached all corners of the globe, the Texas Oil and Gas Association pegged the industry’s share of Texas’ gross state product at 30.5%. According to a spokesperson, the trade group determined that number by finding the sum of the industry’s direct contributions to Texas’ gross state product — $223.1 billion, or about 13.5% of the state economy. 
 Then, to capture the industry’s indirect and induced "ripple" effects, the Oil and Gas Association multiplied the industry’s direct gross state product by 2.3, meaning that every dollar spent in the industry was modeled to generate $2.30 in spin-off economic activity. This multiplier produces an estimated $502.6 billion of economic impact in the state, or 30.5% of the private sector’s gross state product.
 To Karr Ingham, a petroleum economist with the Texas Alliance of Energy Producers, the association's method of calculation using a multiplier of 2.3 is "pretty close to correct."
 "That’s not high. If anything that could be a touch low," Ingham said. "I’ve heard commissioners in the past and other political types and other industry cheerleaders say the multiplier for oil and gas is 7."
 Underperforming years
 Before the pandemic, Texas producers were coming off a couple of down years in 2018 and 2019.
 In 2018, about four years after the global oil prices collapsed and slammed the brakes on Texas’ fracking boom, the industry was hampered by a credit crunch as lackluster oil prices remained volatile. By mid-2019, oil jobs were in decline as companies struggled to provide steady income and growth.
 "It’s been the worst-performing sector on the S&P for the last couple years," said Bill Gilmer, director of the Institute for Regional Forecasting at the University of Houston. "If you take the value of all the producers and add them together, by 2019 they collectively were worth less than Apple."
 According to Gilmer, there are "at least three tough quarters in front of us" before the industry will begin to reassert itself and shake off lasting effects of the pandemic. 
 "By the time we get to 2022 — and it will take that long for us to feel really good about the economy — oil and the U.S. economy will be back," Gilmer said.
 Craddick’s 35% figure reflects the commissioner’s belief that the industry will begin next year stronger than it began 2020. Although several indicators point to an upward trajectory of the industry — like oil prices, jobs, and rig count — Karr said the 35% projection may be slightly optimistic. 
 "It’s a little hard to take issue with [Craddick’s number] just because it’s guesswork," Karr said.
 Our ruling
 Craddick said earlier this month that the oil and gas industry comprises 35% of the Texas economy. Craddick's office clarified that this figure represented the industry’s combined direct, indirect and induced economic impact, and that it represents a projection of how the industry will end the year after its recent bounce back. 
 The oil and gas industry has comprised as much as 40% of the state economy during the last decade’s fracking boom, yet shrunk to 30% before the pandemic shocked the world economy. Firm quarterly data showing the industry’s recent gains will not be released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis until late 2021.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
A widely shared Facebook post claims Democrats unfairly favored minority farmers over white farmers.
 It reads:
 "Minority farmers get big bonus. White ones get none. Demonrats are the party of racism & division."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The COVID-19 relief law passed by Democratic majorities in Congress and signed by President Joe Biden in March gives an estimated $5 billion to farmers in "socially disadvantaged groups" — that is, racial and ethnic minority groups whose members have been subjected to prejudice.
 It’s not strictly speaking a "bonus," as the post states.
 COVID relief includes minority farmer aid
 The $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan was approved 219-212 in the House and 50-49 in the Senate. Democrats hold the majority in both chambers. Two Democrats voted no in the House; none voted no in the Senate. 
 The American Farm Bureau Federation says the law appropriates an estimated $10.4 billion for programs designed to strengthen the agricultural and food supply chain through, for example, COVID-19 mitigation efforts for agricultural workers and more resources to buy and distribute agricultural commodities to nonprofits. Also in that total is an estimated $5 billion for "socially disadvantaged" farmers and ranchers.
 Federal law defines a "socially disadvantaged group" regarding farmers and ranchers as a group whose members "have been subjected to racial or ethnic prejudice because of their identity as members of a group without regard to their individual qualities."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The American Farm Bureau Federation estimates that of the $5 billion, $4 billion will be used to provide direct payments of up to 120% of a socially disadvantaged farmer’s or rancher’s outstanding debt — including Black, Hispanic, Native American and Asian Americans — as of Jan. 1, 2021. The additional 20% on top of paying off the debt is intended to pay off the taxes associated with the amount of the direct payment.
 The other $1 billion will provide outreach, training, education, technical assistance, grants and loans, and funding to educational institutions to help improve land access for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers, according to the farm bureau.
 Proposed Black farmers aid
 Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., and five other Democratic senators introduced in February the Justice For Black Farmers Act, a bill that would provide Black farmers debt relief and access to a land grant program. Booker first introduced the bill on Nov. 30, 2020, but no action was taken. 
 Under the bill, the Agriculture Department would buy agricultural land from willing sellers at fair market value and convey grants of that land of up to 160 acres to eligible Black individuals at no cost. At least 20,000 land grants would be made each year from 2021 through 2030.
 We rated as True Booker’s claim that "there is a direct connection between discriminatory policies within the" Agriculture Department "and the enormous land loss we have seen among Black farmers over the past century." 
 In 1920, there were about 925,700 Black farmers. In 2017, that number was down to 45,500, a decline dramatically larger than that among white farmers. Bias in the implementation of New Deal policies and other farm assistance programs has been widely documented in Agriculture Department reports and legal settlements between the department and Black farmers. Discriminatory practices meant that Black farmers were continually denied opportunities to expand and modernize their farms, experts say.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post claims: "Minority farmers get big bonus, white ones get none," because of Democrats.
 The COVID-19 relief law signed by Biden and approved by Democratic majorities in Congress provides an estimated $5 billion for farmers from socially disadvantaged groups, such as racial minorities, that have been subjected to prejudice. It’s not simply a bonus. 
 The post is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
After touring an Allentown warehouse filled with protective medical equipment, President Donald Trump criticized Gov. Tom Wolf for keeping parts of Pennsylvania closed that the president thinks are no longer threatened by the coronavirus.
 "You have areas of Pennsylvania that are barely affected and [the governor wants] to keep them closed," Trump told a crowd of workers from Owens & Minor, a company that manufactures and distributes masks, gloves and gowns to health care workers, on May 14.
 We wondered whether the statewide stay-at-home order Wolf issued on April 1 still applies to places hardly impacted by the deadly disease.
 It all depends what criteria are used to determine whether the coronavirus still poses a threat.
 The virus is still raging across Southeastern Pennsylvania, and not even Trump is arguing that Philadelphia and its suburbs are ready to reopen. Officials in Delaware and Bucks counties, however, have asked Wolf to exclude their nursing-home populations when he eventually rates their readiness. 
 "Largely when you look across the state, the hardest hit area has been the Southeast of Pennsylvania," said Dr. David Rubin, director of PolicyLab at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, which has been tracking the differences in the outbreak across individual regions of the country.
 The Philadelphia area as far west as Lancaster, Berks and Dauphin counties, and north to the Lehigh Valley have seen some of the worst outbreaks in Pennsylvania, he said.
 "Largely the rest of the state has had a pretty deceptively, sort of minimal experience with COVID," Rubin said.
 That includes Allegheny County, the rural "T" and the South, Central and Southwestern parts of the state.
 "When you have someone in that area of the state that are upset that they are unable to work, they’re not wrong," Rubin said. But for those in the Southeast worried about a resurgence, "they’re not wrong, either."
 Wolf has already moved 37 Pennsylvania counties into what he calls the ‘yellow’ phase of reopening. 
 In these places, many businesses may resume in-person operations, and residents may leave their homes so long as they take precautions. Thirteen counties in Southwestern Pennsylvania moved into the yellow phase May 15. Twenty-four others in the Northern half of the state entered yellow May 8. Another 12 counties will move into yellow on May 22. 
 Counties in the red phase of Wolf’s reopening plan are still under lockdown, with stay-at-home orders in place and all but ‘essential’ businesses closed. Counties that eventually make it to the green phase will ask businesses and individuals to follow Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and State Department of Health guidelines for limiting the spread of the virus but will otherwise have no restrictions. 
 Yellow counties’ gyms, hair salons, and schools must remain closed, and gatherings of more than 25 people are prohibited.
 Even still, yellow is the distinction several other Central and Eastern Pennsylvania counties are clamoring for.
 A key factor that determines whether a county qualifies for yellow privileges is whether it has fewer than 50 new reported coronavirus cases per 100,000 residents over a period of 14 days.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The number of people sickened with the virus in Lancaster, Lebanon, Dauphin, Franklin and Schuylkill counties disqualifies them from entering the yellow phase. But that fact didn’t stop local leaders from announcing plans to reopen businesses anyway – with or without Wolf’s blessing.
 In a series of letters and tweets, the officials, including state lawmakers and county commissioners, begged Wolf to allow local businesses to reopen and better position themselves to survive the crisis. Officials from Dauphin, Franklin and Schuylkill counties later backed down. Lebanon officials are set to vote on reopening today. Lancaster officials held a news conference on the issue Thursday night but did not say what they will do.
 Counties reversed course after Wolf called them ‘cowardly’ and ‘selfish’ and threatened to withhold their federal stimulus funds if they directed businesses and residents to defy his order.
 Until recently, another nine counties found themselves in limbo.
 They had reported fewer than 50 cases per 100,000 residents over a 14-day period, but until May 15, when Wolf announced plans to move them into the yellow phase soon, they remained stuck in the red zone, which requires businesses to stay closed and residents to continue sheltering at home. Those counties include: York, Adams, Perry, Juniata, Mifflin, Carbon, Wyoming, Susquehanna and Wayne.
 Officials from York and Adams counties had been especially vocal about their frustration that businesses had not been cleared to reopen. Some officials said they didn’t understand what was holding them back, given their success keeping coronavirus case counts relatively low.
 Wolf had been asked about the discrepancy several times in recent days before he announced plans to move the counties into yellow by May 22, and his explanations lacked clarity. We had to read a 7,000 word Wolf administration document titled "Process to Reopen Pennsylvania" to figure it out.
 A county’s coronavirus case count is not the only piece of information Wolf’s team uses to determine when it’s ready to move into the yellow phase. He’s said this publicly, but on recent calls with the press, he hasn’t listed the other factors that matter. Carnegie Mellon University researchers advising the state compiled the list and rated counties in each category.
 According to the document, the other factors are:
 A county’s ability to meet a surge in demand for intensive care.
 A county’s density.
 The share of county residents who are over age 60.
 The share of county residents who work in "physically closed" industry sectors, such as nursing homes. 
 When those pieces are considered, it appears York County was held back from reopening because of its population density, and Adams County was ordered to stay closed because it has an insufficient number of intensive care unit beds. Mifflin, Juniata, Perry, Carbon, Susquehanna and Wayne counties were also flagged because of limited ICU capacity.
 We had to click through a link tucked at the bottom of a May 8 press release to find a May 7 PowerPoint presentation detailing how each Pennsylvania county rates on the Carnegie Mellon risk assessment scale. It’s unclear if county officials calling to have their stay-at-home orders lifted know where to find their own ratings.
 Wyoming County in the Northeast corner of the state has a small number of coronavirus cases and doesn’t rate as high risk in any of the other categories. Before Wolf announced that Wyoming County would move into the yellow phase by May 22, it was unclear why Wolf wouldn’t allow businesses there to reopen. County officials had announced plans to reopen without Wolf’s approval and later backed down. 
 In the "Process to Reopen Pennsylvania" document, the state cautioned that the reopening process will be fluid and that the Carnegie Mellon rating system is not designed to "make decisions but rather to inform decision makers."
 Our ruling
 Trump said that Wolf wants to keep parts of Pennsylvania closed that have been "barely affected" by the coronavirus. Trump was likely speaking about counties in Central and Eastern Pennsylvania like Lebanon and Lancaster whose Republican lawmakers have been clamoring for more freedom even though their coronavirus case counts remain relatively high. Those places have not been "barely affected." They’re battling active outbreaks. Trump was right, though, that until May 15, Wolf wanted to keep closed nine counties with relatively few cases. For these reasons, we rate Trump’s statement Half True.
West Virginia University faculty members held a special meeting on Sept. 1 to begin consideration of a proposal to strengthen the university’s rules on the coronavirus by making vaccines mandatory on campus.
 During the meeting, one faculty member — Kathryn Moffett Bradford, the division chief of pediatric infectious diseases at WVU's School of Medicine — offered a statistic that she said supported the importance of getting vaccinated for the coronavirus.
 "If you look at the hospitalizations at Ruby Memorial in West Virginia, and around the country, 90% to 95% of those hospitalized are unvaccinated," she said. She was referring to J.W. Ruby Memorial Hospital in Morgantown, W.Va., which is part of WVU’s health system.
 Angela Knopf, director of media relations and public affairs for J.W. Ruby Memorial Hospital, confirmed to PolitiFact West Virginia that at the time the faculty meeting was held on Sept. 1, about 90% to 95% of the patients hospitalized for COVID-19 were unvaccinated. 
 Moreover, Knopf said that as of Sept. 13, 2021, fully 100% of the patients in the intensive care unit at Ruby Memorial were unvaccinated. 
 How about the numbers nationally? The share of the unvaccinated in hospitals for COVID-19 is also well above 90%. 
 As of Aug. 2, 2021, more than 164 million people in the United States had been fully vaccinated and, based on reports from 49 U.S. states and territories, there were 7,525 breakthrough cases in which the person was hospitalized or died, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, we reported in August. That comes out to less than one-hundredth of 1%.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 10, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Italy drastically reduced the country’s official COV1D-19 death count by over 97%. This means Covid killed fewer people than an average seasonal flu.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This pattern was borne out by a subsequent study published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Between April 4 to July 17 of 2021, the study found, a bit over 92% of those hospitalized for COVID-19 were not fully vaccinated. 
 That number refers to those who had received their first dose of the vaccine but not their second dose. These numbers also only reflect the 13 U.S. states that were involved in the study, which is about 25% of the U.S. population.
 Our ruling
 Bradford said, "If you look at the hospitalizations at Ruby Memorial in West Virginia, and around the country, 90% to 95% of those hospitalized are unvaccinated." 
 Ruby Memorial Hospital confirmed that at the time of her remark, about 90% to 95% of those hospitalized for COVID-19 were unvaccinated. 
 As for the national picture, statistics from the CDC published both before and after her comment broadly support those percentages.
 We rate the claim True.
 CORRECTION, Oct. 6, 2021: This version corrects the spelling of Angela Knopf's name.
State Sen. Caleb Rowden is disappointed with how Boone County has handled $21.2 million in federal COVID-19 relief funds. 
 "Boone County’s online CARES relief portal has fallen behind," he wrote Sept. 4 on Medium.com. "Over three months after receiving CARES Act relief funds from the State, the county has still not made those dollars available to help struggling Mid-Missourians." 
 County Commissioner Janet Thompson took issue with his statement. She said over $2 million was sent to two organizations: the Boone County Department of Health and Columbia Public Schools. 
 "Perhaps Sen. Rowden should actually contact the Boone County Commission to find out exactly what we’re doing," she said. 
 A dispute over facts? That’s our specialty. 
 After digging into the question, we found that the county had not actually given out any CARES funds by Sept. 4, although some of the money has been promised. So when did Boone County receive the money, and what happened to it?
 The money trail 
 When reached for comment, Rowden pointed to a variety of sources to back his claim, including news articles published by the Columbia Missourian, a press release issued by the Missouri Governor’s office, and a summary of House bill 2014, which Rowden voted for in the Missouri Senate.
 Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act on March 27. It gave money to states and Missouri, in turn, gave some of those funds to every county plus St. Louis City to help offset economic damage from the coronavirus pandemic. The state bill that authorized disbursement of CARES money, HB 2014, was signed into law by Gov. Mike Parson on April 10. Boone County received $21.2 million, which must be completely spent by Dec. 31 or the entire amount will be returned to the state.
 Parson announced May 4 that the money had been sent. Two days later, Boone County received the money.
 On July 16, Boone County commissioners said they were looking at buying software to build a portal for relief applications from organizations and the general public. The commissioners said it would likely be ready within a month, according to reporting in the Columbia Missourian.
 On Aug. 28, the Missourian reported Thompson’s announcement that the online portal would be ready for applications within a few weeks. 
 At the time that state Sen. Rowden made his statement on Sept. 4, the portal was not online. By Sept. 9, the portal had been made available.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 So...where’s the money?
 In an email, Thompson said the commission had spent $2.1 million on requests from the Boone County Department of Health, and to Columbia Public Schools as a proxy to the other five school districts in Boone County. 
 What did Thompson mean by spent? "If by ‘spent,’ you mean out the door/in another entity’s hands, that is what was ‘spent’ as of September 6, 2020," Thompson wrote.
 But was it? Not according to the Boone County Department of Health and county records. 
 On Aug. 11, The Columbia/Boone County Department of Health and Human Services was approved to receive $1.8 million to hire 40 full-time employees through December. These employees included disease investigators, contact tracers, health educators, data analysts, and communicable disease specialists. The money was also to pay for additional COVID-19 testing, especially for uninsured and under-insured individuals.
 Health Department Assistant Director Scott Clardy said in a Sept. 11 interview that money had not yet been received from the county, as the Health Department had to submit an invoice to the county and later get reimbursed.
 Meanwhile, all six Boone County school districts requested $322,800 for 1,345 Wi-Fi hotspots. The county commission approved the request on Aug. 20. The $322,800 was to be pre-paid by CPS and reimbursed by the county. 
 According to district spokesperson Michelle Baumstark, the Board of Education approved the purchase agreement for the hotspots, using CARES funding, on Sept. 14. 
 The CARES Act money is designated to be sent out as reimbursements, upon "provision…. of adequate documentation showing appropriately incurred expenses," according to the county orders that approved the money to both Columbia Public Schools and the Department of Health.
 Thompson said there were "at least three requests in the works" that, if fully funded, would exceed $11 million. But, that’s anticipated money — not money spent, which was the basis of Rowden’s complaint.
 Our ruling
 Caleb Rowden said: "Over three months after receiving CARES Act relief funds from the state, the county has still not made those dollars available to help struggling Mid-Missourians." 
 Evidence from the Boone County Department of Health and county records back that up.
 We found that $2.1 million had been approved for two organizations that requested CARES Act funds. But that money had not been sent by the Boone County Commission at the time of Rowden’s post. Although it was promised, the money had not hit the bank accounts of either organization.
 We rate this claim True.
During a CNN town hall before the South Carolina primary, Mike Bloomberg — a former New York City mayor and Democratic presidential candidate — was asked whether he had confidence in President Donald Trump to handle a potential coronavirus pandemic, officially known as the COVID-19 virus.
 After jokingly saying, "I feel so much better," Bloomberg told the audience, "No. 1, he fired the pandemic team two years ago. No. 2, he's been defunding the Centers for Disease Control. So, we don't have the experts in place that we need. I hope he's right that the virus doesn't come here, that nobody gets sick. That would be a wonderful outcome. But the bottom line is, we are not ready for this kind of thing."
 Bloomberg had a point that the Trump administration ousted some of its officials dealing with global pandemics, but "defunding" the CDC is more complicated than he let on.
 "He fired the pandemic team two years ago"
 "Fired" may be a strong word, but there have been abrupt changes to key national security posts with responsibility for global pandemics. More recently the administration has assigned new officials to take leadership roles.
 In May 2018, the top White House official in charge of the U.S. response to pandemics left the administration. Rear Admiral Timothy Ziemer was the senior director of global health and biodefense on the National Security Council and oversaw global health security issues, a specialty that had been bolstered under President Barack Obama.
 After Ziemer’s departure, the global health team was reorganized as part of an effort by then-National Security Adviser John Bolton. Meanwhile, Tom Bossert, a homeland security adviser who recommended strong defenses against disease and biological warfare, was reportedly pushed out by Bolton in 2018. Neither White House official or their teams, which were responsible for coordinating the U.S. response to pandemic outbreaks across agencies, have been replaced during the past two years.
 In November 2019, a bipartisan group of lawmakers and experts formally recommended that health security leadership on the NSC should be restored. And on Feb. 18, 2020, a group of 27 senators sent a letter to current National Security Adviser Robert O’Brien to ask him to appoint a new global health security expert to the NSC.
 "The fact that they explicitly dismantled the office in the White House that was tasked with preparing for exactly this kind of a risk is hugely concerning," Jeremy Konyndyk, who ran foreign disaster assistance in the Obama administration, told the Guardian. "Both the structure and all the institutional memory is gone now."
 Instead, Trump has looked within his administration to fill roles for the coronavirus response. 
 Last month, Trump appointed his Health and Human Services Secretary, Alex Azar, to chair a coronavirus task force. On Feb. 26, he announced that Vice President Mike Pence would be taking charge of the U.S. response to the coronavirus. 
 And the following day, Pence announced he was appointing Ambassador Debbie Birx to assist the effort as "White House coronavirus response coordinator." Birx is a physician and global health expert who is currently responsible for coordinating the State Department's HIV/AIDS task force. The White House said she will be supported by NSC staff in her role.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "He's been defunding Centers for Disease Control."
 It’s not accurate to say that Trump has been "defunding" the CDC, but he has tried to make cuts in key programs. It’s just that Congress didn’t listen.
 The Trump administration’s initial proposals for the budgets for emerging and zoonotic infectious diseases at CDC — a key player in the fight against coronavirus — have consistently been lower than what was spent the previous year. 
 The administration proposed $61.7 million less in 2018 than 2017; $96.4 million less in 2019 than in 2018; $114.4 million less in 2020 than in 2019; and $85.3 million less in 2021 than 2020.
 However, Congress reshapes presidential recommendations as they see fit when they craft final spending bills.
 Every year since Trump has been president, lawmakers have passed bills — bills signed by Trump — that not only exceeded what Trump requested on emerging infections but also exceeded what had been spent the previous year.
 As the chart below shows, funding increased every year from fiscal year 2017 to fiscal year 2020. (We have not included the 2017 proposal, since that was submitted by the Obama administration. The figures for 2020 are preliminary.)
 
 It’s important to note that Trump has asked Congress for a $2.5 billion supplemental budget to help combat the emergence of this coronavirus. House Democrats quickly said the amount was insufficient to meet current threats, and Trump said he was willing to seek more if lawmakers were willing.
 In addition, the Trump campaign pointed to consistent funding for certain budget sub-categories, such as CDC’s public health emergency preparedness, which helps states and localities deal with public health emergencies, including outbreaks. That program suffered funding losses that predate Trump.
 Our ruling
 Bloomberg said Trump is hampered in the fight against coronavirus because "No. 1, he fired the pandemic team two years ago. No. 2, he's been defunding Centers for Disease Control."
 On the first point, it’s hard to pin down whether the National Security Council staffers were "fired" in 2018, but they certainly left abruptly and have not been replaced, though other leaders in the coronavirus fight have been named in recent days.
 On the second point — funding — there’s no question that the Trump administration sought to cut key CDC budget categories that would be involved in emerging infections like coronavirus. But Bloomberg overlooks that, thanks to Congress, that funding was restored and even increased in bills that were ultimately signed by Trump.
 The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details, so we rate it Half True.
The ideological split on in-person schooling during the pandemic was pretty predictable through most of 2020.
 Those who generally favored lockdowns and other strong mitigation measures opposed in-person schooling, while those who derided lockdowns, mask orders and the like typically supported it.
 Like much related to COVID-19, however, positions have shifted on this issue as more data and studies have emerged.
 One prominent Wisconsin Republican says that research now supports a more widescale return to the classroom.
 "It's time to get kids back in school," U.S. Rep. Mike Gallagher, R-Green Bay, said in a Dec. 7, 2020, tweet. "New data shows in-person learning isn't driving spikes in cases, and school closures leave us with the worst of both worlds: students falling further behind without a significant impact on slowing the spread."
 Is Gallagher right that in-person learning isn’t driving a spike in cases?
 In a word: Yes.
 The cost of online schooling
 The push against virtual schooling — embraced by most school districts starting in March — has strengthened as a growing body of research shows the toll being out of the classroom takes on learning.
 In fall 2020 assessments, students in grades 3 to 8 performed similarly to same-grade students last year in reading, but 5 to 10 percentage points lower in math, according to a November report from NWEA, a research-based nonprofit group that assessed 4.4 million students.
 A November report from Renaissance Learning Inc. similarly found students falling behind in math, with some grades 12 weeks or more behind.
 The move online has in many cases worsened existing socioeconomic achievement gaps as well, since online learning works only when students have consistent internet access and home support, according to research compiled by the Economic Policy Institute and others.
 Meanwhile, the science shows school doesn’t present the risk many experts expected.
 What we’ve learned from the schools that opened
 As with many other pandemic response measures, the diversity of local guidelines governing schools has created a natural experiment.
 "Children and schools are not the main drivers of the epidemic across countries," said a UNICEF report published in November. "Evidence shows that the net benefits of keeping schools open outweigh the costs of closing them. Data from 191 countries show no consistent association between school reopening status and COVID-19 infection rates."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An international research report out of Spain found a similar lack of correlation, as did a study by Insights for Education that said there is "no consistent pattern between school status and infection levels."
 Even Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, is now advocating for a measured return to in-class instruction.
 "The default position should be to try as best as possible within reason to keep the children in school, or to get them back to school," he said on ABC’s "This Week" on Nov. 29, 2020. "If you look at the data, the spread among children and from children is not really very big at all, not like one would have suspected. So, let's try to get the kids back, but let's try to mitigate the things that maintain and just push … community spread" like capacity seating indoors at restaurants and bars.
 One project run by Emily Oster, an economist at Brown University, has gathered data from 13 million in-person students (some multiple times) since September, in partnership with schools around the U.S. That data showed an infection rate of 2.2 students per 1,000 over a two-week period. The staff infection rate over that span was 4.2 per 1,000.
 (Wisconsin was notably worse in both categories, averaging 7 infections per 1,000 students and 19 per 1,000 staff members)
 "The numbers are small — smaller than what many had forecasted," Oster wrote in an Atlantic article detailing her early findings in October.
 CDC data shows children under age 18 make up about 10% of cases in the U.S., though they comprise 22% of the total population. (Children account for just 0.1% of deaths.)
 The key asterisk is that in-person instruction is safest when mitigation measures remain in place in both schools and the community.
 The CDC recommends use of masks and following other guidelines such as social distancing, washing hands, and regularly cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces in schools and buses. PolitiFact Missouri noted this in rating Mostly True a claim that schools using these strategies "remain among the safest places for our students."
 Jordan Dunn, press secretary for Gallagher, cited this research and Fauci’s comments in defending Gallagher’s statement.
 "That’s not to say there isn’t transmission in schools and schools should re-open without common sense safety measures," Dunn said in an email. "But the data that has been collected suggests, as Rep. Gallagher states, that in-person learning is not driving spikes in cases and schools are not super-spreaders."
 Our ruling
 Gallagher said, "New data shows in-person learning isn't driving spikes in cases."
 Indeed, research from an array of sources in October and November show in-person instruction has not been tied to increased cases in those areas.
 Key leaders including Fauci have acknowledged classroom instruction caused fewer issues than expected, leading him to support a shift away from virtual learning.
 We rate this claim True.
When Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden visited Manitowoc on Sept. 21, his stop – at the Wisconsin Aluminum Foundry – had a blue-collar bent.
 So did his message.
 "President talks all the time about how great the economy is," Biden told a group of workers.
 But, he noted, many places and sectors are not doing well amid the economic fallout of COVID-19, unemployment remains high and many Americans are at risk of losing their homes. Then he drew a sharp contrast: 
 "Now, the billionaires in this country are seeing their wealth increase by $800 billion," Biden said: "Let me explain that again: all the billionaires in America, during the pandemic, their net worth combined, according to studies, have increased by $800 billion." 
 Is Biden right?
 The report and methodology
 When asked for backup on the claim, a representative for Biden’s campaign pointed to an update of a report by the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning Washington D.C. think tank. 
 The report, "Billionaire Bonanza 2020," was done by the institute in partnership with Americans for Tax Fairness. The latter falls under the non-profit New Venture Fund, which is managed by a for-profit company, Arabella Advisors, that consults on philanthropy. 
 They used numbers from two features by Forbes.
 The first, is Forbes’ annual list of billionaires, "The Richest in 2020," which was published April 7. That list was compiled based on stock prices and exchange rates on March 18. That would be one week after the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus a pandemic on March 11. (Trump declared a national emergency on March 13.)
 The second is Forbes’ "The World’s Real-Time Billionaires," an online list that tracks the net worth of billionaires using that day’s stock prices and exchange rates.
 For its analysis, the group compared the two, and linked to a spreadsheet that showed the change in the billionaires’ net worth between March 18 and Sept. 15 was $845.1 billion. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 To be sure, not all billionaires gained during the time period, and not all billionaires listed had net worth numbers associated with them.
 But the overall change tracks well with what Biden said.
 That said, there is a wrinkle to discuss.
 The data used by the think tank roughly covers the period from when the coronavirus was formally declared a pandemic.
 But by that point, the coronavirus had been spreading around the globe for several months -- and already had an effect on stock prices and wealth. While there is no measuring stick available to begin the tally from January, it’s safe to say that picture would be somewhat different.
 The Institute for Policy Studies did not respond to email requests for comment from PolitiFact Wisconsin.
 But Timothy Smeeding, a University of Wisconsin-Madison professor of public affairs, noted there was some decline in the stock market prior to that low point at the end of March. Since then, it has overall been improving. 
 So, the study only looks at gains during the bounceback from a very low point in the market. That may serve to exaggerate the growth during the pandemic at least to some degree.
 Our ruling
 Citing a study, Biden claimed that billionaires in America saw their net worth grow by $800 billion during the pandemic.
 That number tracks with what the study found. And, while the dates in the study do not match up perfectly with when the coronavirus was declared a pandemic, they are close. 
 That said, the effects of COVID-19 on things such as the stock market were being felt before the pandemic declaration, so the timetable being used may exaggerate the growth a bit because it uses a low starting point.
 Our definition for Mostly True is "the statement is accurate but needs clarification or additional information."
 That fits here.
Fox Business host Lou Dobbs, a vocal supporter of President Donald Trump and his allies, challenged the president’s top health official recently on the administration’s handling of the 2019 coronavirus outbreak.
 Dobbs criticized Health and Human Secretary Alex Azar over a lack of transparency in the agency’s handling of COVID-19, which has infected nearly 91,000 people globally across 73 countries and led to more than nine American deaths. 
 "There’s a better ratio of testing for the coronavirus in other countries than we maintain here," Dobbs said during the March 2 interview on his TV show. "We’re actually screening fewer people because we don’t have appropriate testing."
 Azar countered that the Trump administration has taken recent steps to roll back regulations and increase the availability of diagnostic test kits to "hundreds and thousands and millions."
 
 The United States is set to significantly expand its testing capabilities in the coming days and weeks, but Dobbs is correct that the country has lagged behind other nations so far.
 "It is true that diagnostic capacity in the U.S. has been lower than in some other countries, but that is changing," said Caitlin Rivers, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
 The trouble with testing numbers
 It’s hard to pinpoint how many people have been tested for the coronavirus, both in the U.S. and around the world. The World Health Organization doesn’t track the number of tests administered in each country, and the numbers that are available are constantly updating.
 In a statement to PolitiFact, a Fox News spokesperson representing Dobbs cited data from the WorldOMeter, a real-time tool that "shows estimated current numbers based on statistics and projections from the most reputable official organizations," according to its website.
 Using estimates derived from official government sources, the WorldOMeter says at least eight countries — South Korea, Italy, Austria, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Finland, Vietnam and Turkey — have given more tests relative to the size of their populations than the United States. 
 That lines up with experts’ analyses and with what multiple news outlets have reported. 
 Marc Lipsitch, professor of epidemiology at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, said South Korea "has screened at least thousands, and Guangdong, China, has screened at least hundreds of thousands," citing a WHO report on the outbreak in China, where the virus was first detected.
 South Korea ramped up testing by building drive-thru screening clinics for speedy assessments, according to local reports. Other countries, like Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Italy have also conducted thousands of diagnostic tests.
 "We have done nothing like what other countries have done," Lipsitch said, noting that the U.S. had, until recently, limited not only the number of labs that were allowed to conduct tests on suspected cases, but also the number of patients that were eligible to be screened.
 It’s difficult to say just how far behind the U.S. has fallen, due to the murkiness around the number of administered tests. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention stopped releasing a public count of tests on March 2.
 The administration’s public statements haven’t cleared it up. On Feb. 29, the CDC reported testing 472 Americans. A day later, Azar told ABC News the U.S. had tested over 3,600 people. And a spokesperson for HHS, Azar’s agency, told us on March 3 that the CDC had tested samples from more than 1,200 patients.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "I don't know how to track U.S. tests any more," Lipsitch said.
 
 Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar speaks at the White House about the coronavirus on Feb. 28, 2020, in Washington. (AP/Vucci)
 The CDC stopped posting testing data as more state and local public-health labs have been brought into the fold, said Nancy Messonnier, a top CDC official, said during a March 3 briefing.
 "With more and more testing done at states, these numbers would not be representative of the testing being done nationally," she said.
 An HHS spokesperson told us that the department doesn’t know how many additional tests have been administered by those state and local labs, adding that those labs can now test up to 15,000 people and are expected to be able to test as many as 75,000 people by March 6.
 The U.S. test count should rise into the millions as IDT, a commercial manufacturer, and other commercial and academic labs begin producing their own tests soon, according to HHS.
 Why the United States lagged behind
 The government’s initial testing effort was hindered by flaws with the CDC’s early test kits and restrictions that had limited which labs could run the tests and which patients could be tested.
 When the first U.S. coronavirus was detected, the country brushed aside the WHO test used by other nations and leaned on the CDC to develop and mass produce a more complicated test capable of detecting other viruses in addition to the coronavirus, according to reports.
 The test kits went out in early February. But some state labs that received them reported that flaws in the tests were triggering inconclusive results. Those states had to ship samples out to the CDC’s offices in Atlanta for results until the CDC fixed the problem weeks later.
 Since then, the Food and Drug Administration has given labs and hospitals across the country the go-ahead to administer their own tests before the FDA finishes reviewing them, so long as those tests are proven to work. That should lead to more testing, experts said.
 The CDC also modified its screening criteria to expand testing for some people with severe respiratory symptoms who did not travel to China or come into known contact with a coronavirus patient. Previously, travel to China or exposure to the virus were preconditions for screening.
 Adequate testing is essential to getting an accurate count of U.S. cases, experts said.
 Testing is also key for treating patients and identifying people who might be infected but don’t show symptoms, said Richard Watanabe, professor of preventive medicine at the University of Southern California.
 "The latest data suggests the incubation period for COVID-19 can be as long as a couple of weeks," Watanabe said. 
 Despite the recent acceleration, Lipsitch said U.S. testing is happening "very slowly and at a level that is still paltry" compared with some other countries.
 Our ruling
 Dobbs said that the United States is "actually screening fewer people (for the coronavirus than other countries) because we don’t have appropriate testing."
 Experts told us that to date, the United States has lagged behind other countries, though numbers are imprecise. An error with the CDC’s early test kits contributed to the United States’ relatively low screening numbers. The administration has taken steps to make testing more widely available.
 With that additional information, we rate Dobbs’ statement Mostly True.
Coronavirus vaccine mandates are spreading, and with them, pushback based on religion.
 In Washington, D.C., about 1,500 city health care workers are seeking exemptions for religious reasons. Over 2,000 Los Angeles Police Department workers have filed a lawsuit objecting on religious or medical grounds. 
 When asked on CNN’s "State of the Union" about the number of religions that bar vaccination, infectious disease chief Dr. Anthony Fauci said there aren’t many.
 "There are precious few religions that actually say, you cannot do that," Fauci said Oct. 3. "I mean, literally less than a handful."
 
 
 When host Dana Bash asked about people who said it was a matter of their personal faith, not formal doctrine, Fauci said it would be difficult to sort out who might be using that as an excuse.
 We were curious about the official positions on vaccination among organized religions. Fauci’s statement that very few religions ban getting the shot is accurate, but the law is less concerned with what religious doctrine states and more focused on the individual’s conviction and behavior.
 Religious bans
 Vanderbilt University Medical Center’s review of immunization and religions identified a small subset of Christian faiths that oppose vaccination on theological grounds. There are five, a group that includes the Dutch Reformed Church, Church of the First Born, Faith Assembly and Endtime Ministries. The Vanderbilt list is largely a topline overview, not a comprehensive study of all religions worldwide.
 Many people might instantly think of Christian Scientists. While many Christian Scientists rely on prayer for healing, the Christian Science Church offered guidance to its members on vaccines in early 2019. It said that "for more than a century, our denomination has counseled respect for public health authorities and conscientious obedience to the laws of the land, including those requiring vaccination." 
 Church leaders impose no decision on church members, but they encourage them to recognize the seriousness of public health concerns.
 "Church members are free to make their own choices on all life-decisions, in obedience to the law, including whether or not to vaccinate," the statement said.
 Protestant faiths, Islam, Roman and Orthodox Catholicism, Judaism, Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and more have no prohibition against vaccination. The Vanderbilt survey named 24 religions in this group.
 As a counting exercise, Fauci’s statement holds up. But formal doctrine doesn’t drive American law. The Constitution bars the government from getting involved in the establishment of any religion. That would include judging whether a religion held a formal status. Instead, the courts focus on the individual.
 "The standard is the sincerity of the personal belief, not whether you're part of an organized religion that prohibits vaccines," said University of California Hastings Law School professor Dorit Rubenstein Reiss.
 Religious exemptions and the courts
 Like most, if not all, vaccine mandates, the one for Washington, D.C. workers includes an exemption for "sincerely held religious beliefs."
 "The problem, of course, is that it can be difficult to disentangle the reasons why someone objects," said Wendy Parmet, a Northeastern University law professor. "States or employers that reject a requested exemption could be vulnerable to litigation." 
 What a court has to decide is whether the belief is religious and whether it is sincere.
 "A fervently held personal belief can be religious in nature even if it is not endorsed by any recognized or organized religious group," Lindsay Wiley, a law professor at American University. "But not all personal beliefs are religious in nature."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wiley pointed to a 2020 case when an employee at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia refused to get a flu vaccine. She was fired and then she sued, saying she had been discriminated against for her religion. The Third Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals didn’t buy it.
 In terms of religion, the court wrote that it was looking for beliefs that "address fundamental and ultimate questions having to do with deep and imponderable matters," and "are comprehensive in nature."
 The court said the employee had given inconsistent reasons, at one point having said that she thought the vaccine would do more harm than good. That, the court said, was a medical, not religious, belief.
 Courts might judge present religious sincerity based on past behavior.
 "It's relevant if the person has never refused vaccines in the past," said Michelle Mello, a law professor at Stanford University. 
 A history of opposing mask mandates might also weigh against a claim based on religion. A federal court in Pennsylvania ruled against a woman who argued that a mask mandate at her child’s school violated her interpretation of the Bible. She said that she believed that "people are made in the image of God and it therefore dishonors God to cover our faces."
 The judge was unpersuaded about the sincerity of that belief when the woman said she relied on a specific biblical verse, and then was unclear on what the verse said.
 For the federal workforce, a group of managers from various agencies developed a questionnaire for federal employees seeking a religious exemption. It aligns very closely with the way courts have assessed religious belief and sincerity.
 The template asks employees to explain how getting vaccinated would "substantially burden your religious exercise." It asks how long they have held the specific belief, and whether, as an adult, they have been vaccinated before to prevent such diseases as tetanus or flu. If their religious objection is to the COVID-19 vaccine in particular, the questionnaire asks why this vaccine is different.
 Accommodating religious practices
 Two legal frameworks shape how courts consider the intersection of vaccine mandates and religion. For employers, both private and public, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act is key. That section prohibits discrimation based on religion. 
 When mandates apply to non-employment situations, such as school and college campus requirements, the Constitution and the right to the free exercise of religion is more important. And there are instances, such as state-level policies, where both the Civil Rights Act and the Constitution can apply.
 Under the Civil Rights Act, employers must offer a "reasonable accommodation" for a sincerely held religious belief. An accommodation is reasonable, so long as it doesn’t impose an "undue hardship" on the firm.
 "Undue hardship is defined in Title VII in quite an employer-friendly way," said Mello at Stanford Law School. "If it's more than a minimal burden on business operations, the employer can decline to provide any accommodation."
 The legal experts we reached said the present interpretation of the constitutional guidelines is less clear cut.
 "Ordinarily, an epidemic would justify restrictions that burdened religious beliefs somewhat, but the current majority of Supreme Court justices seem to be indicating that there are almost always accommodations that the government can give to religious practices," said Wendy Mariner, a Boston University law professor.
 Mariner highlighted the 2021 U.S. Supreme Court ruling against California’s limits on religious gatherings. The majority wrote that the state "has not shown that ‘public health would be imperiled’ by employing less restrictive measures."
 Our ruling
 Fauci said that very few religions prohibit vaccination. A survey of religious beliefs by Vanderbilt University backs that up. The survey named five religions that stand against vaccinations, and 24 that accept them.
 Fauci acknowledged that assessing a person’s religious beliefs can be complicated. The standard for American courts is not a formal stance by a religious organization but whether a person’s belief is genuinely religious and sincere. 
 Fauci’s statement is correct, but there’s a lot more to unpack.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
 CORRECTION, Oct. 6: The original version of this check put the date of the Christian Science statement on vaccines after the vaccines were introduced, but the statement came before the pandemic started. A church spokesman said the statement "remains current as we continue to consider evolving requirements relating to Covid-19, including vaccination mandates."
The coronavirus pandemic has prompted temporary border closures around the globe. Is Australia closing its borders for six months, as some online posts suggest? It’s possible, but that hasn’t been determined.
 "Australia Closing Borders in a few hours for 6-months," said the headline of a March 20 post on sydneynews.sydney, shared on Facebook.
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The headline in sydneynews.sydney gives the impression that the 6-month time frame is a certainty. That’s not the case. Other news outlets, including the Guardian and Sky News, have posted more cautious headlines, saying the borders "could be closed for six months."
 Australia’s Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced March 19 that Australia would close its borders to all non-citizens and non-residents on March 20 at 9 p.m. Australian Eastern Daylight Time. (Exemptions apply for close immediate family members of Australian residents and citizens.)
 The travel ban is part of a series of measures Australia is taking to slow the spread of the coronavirus. The government said that about 80% of coronavirus cases in Australia were people who caught the virus overseas or people in contact with individuals who returned from overseas.
 The Australian government has said that the virus could be around for at least six months and that Australians should brace for disruptions in daily life. Whether the ban lasts six months is uncertain, as it’s exact duration has not been determined.
 In media interviews, Australia’s Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the travel ban would last as long as medical experts say it’s necessary, but that it was hard to put a precise date on when the ban would be lifted.
 Here’s an exchange he had March 19 with Patricia Karvelas of ABC Radio National, according to a government transcript:
 Karvelas: "So just, again, level with us. Could this travel ban last for six months at least?"
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Frydenberg: "The travel ban will last as long as the medical experts tell us that we need to prevent the spread of the virus, and one way to do that is through the steps that announced today."
 Karvelas: "So you accept that it could be closed. I just want to nail down a timeframe for this six-month period that we're looking at."
 Frydenberg: "You're asking me to put a date on something that not even the medical experts can put a date on."
 Karvelas: "No, but the Prime Minister has put a date on it. He said for six months you can expect these changes, so I expect that's the timeframe."
 Frydenberg: "To be fair to him, he actually said six months at least."
 Karvelas: "Does that mean a travel ban could even be longer than six months?"
 Frydenberg: "Again, as your listeners would expect us to do, we follow the medical advice and not even the medical experts know how long the spread of the virus will continue and the date upon which a vaccine will be found."
 Our ruling
 An online post said, "Australia Closing Borders in a few hours for 6-months."
 Officials have said the coronavirus outbreak and related disruptions in Australia could last at least six months. To slow the spread of the virus, Australia has banned entry to non-Australian residents and citizens and their immediate families. But it has not determined whether the travel ban will last six months.
 Officials say it will remain in effect until it’s safe to lift, but have not given a specific date for its end date.
 The online post is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. We rate it Half True.
During an April 15 virtual town hall meeting with front-line workers, former Vice President Joe Biden, the Democrats’ presumptive nominee for the White House, was asked by a meat processing worker what he would do to protect workers like her from COVID-19.
 "We lost a co-worker at my plant because there is no regulation to protect meat chain employees," said Safaa Elzakzoky, who is also a member of the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union. "We can’t work safely and get people the meat that they need to eat. So what would you do to protect a worker like my friend who just died?"
 In his response, Biden called attention to steps taken by the Obama administration during the H1N1 outbreak and criticized the Trump administration. He focused on "failures" by the Labor Department and its Occupational Safety and Health Administration to use regulatory powers to protect workers, including OSHA’s lack of action in enforcing specific worker safety guidelines related to COVID-19.
 OSHA issued an advisory guidance in early March on how employers can protect workers from COVID-19, which included encouraging businesses to develop infectious disease plans, to allow frequent hand-washing, to urge workers to stay home when they feel sick and to provide face masks to employees.
 Biden asserted that the agency’s actions fall far short.
 "Until this week, they weren’t even enforcing these guidelines. Still today, OSHA is not specifying which rules employees must follow or how to keep their workers safe and healthy," said Biden.
 With President Donald Trump’s coronavirus response emerging as a political flashpoint in the presidential campaign, we decided to dig into the administration’s role in ensuring worker safety. And, as headlines increasingly detail how those on the front lines — health care workers as well as those in grocery stores and meatpacking plants and across the food supply chain — have contracted and died of COVID-19, we thought it was important to check the veracity of Biden’s claim.
 We contacted Biden’s campaign to find out the basis for his response. Staffers sent us an April 9 blog post from the National Employment Law Project, an advocacy group for workers, that outlines how the Trump administration’s OSHA has failed to stipulate and enforce adequate employee protections during the pandemic. They also sent us OSHA’s April 13 enforcement directive.
 What could OSHA do?
 OSHA is tasked with ensuring that workplaces are safe and healthy. The agency sets standards and has inspectors determine if workplaces are compliant. If they are not, OSHA issues citations and requires employers to address the problem within a certain timeframe. Failure to do so results in fines or other sanctions.
 These standards tend to be broad statements that can take a decade to develop and implement. For instance, two Obama-era OSHA officials — David Michaels, the Labor Department’s assistant secretary for OSHA from 2009 to 2017, and Debbie Berkowitz, a senior OSHA official from 2009 to 2015 — told us they had worked on developing an infectious disease standard for years, but that effort was halted in 2017 by the Trump administration. 
 However, OSHA also can issue an "emergency temporary standard" during a public health emergency, such as the current coronavirus pandemic.
 Major unions, including the AFL-CIO and National Nurses United, have petitioned OSHA for an emergency temporary standard that would codify that a variety of types of workers are at risk of exposure to COVID-19 and issue detailed safety requirements for specific industries. So far, though, OSHA has not taken this emergency action.
 Also, the March advisory guidance is not enforceable, said Michaels and Berkowitz. The guideline includes language stating that it is "not a standard or regulation and creates no new legal obligations." And though this document sketched out certain recommendations that would reduce workers’ risk of exposure to COVID-19, when OSHA put out its April 13 enforcement directive, it didn’t mandate that any of those recommendations be followed by workplaces or enforced by OSHA inspectors.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 10, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Italy drastically reduced the country’s official COV1D-19 death count by over 97%. This means Covid killed fewer people than an average seasonal flu.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Michaels and Berkowitz pointed out that OSHA’s COVID-19 directive is geared toward health care facilities, indicating that workplaces like food processing plants and grocery stores are untouched by the directive.
 But Edwin Foulke, who ran OSHA during part of President George W. Bush’s administration, had a different take.
 Since the agency has a limited number of inspectors, the focus on health care facilities is logical, he said.
 "Unfortunately, there is a death component to this virus, and obviously health care is the area where workers are most likely to be exposed," said Foulke, now a partner at the Fisher Phillips law firm in Atlanta and Arlington, Virginia.
 "They put out the general publication on coronavirus, and now they’re doing all these specific industry guidelines on how to deal with health issues. I’m not sure what more, looking at a real world scenario, they could do. What would it entail? And how is it going to help?" he said. 
 For its part, an OSHA spokesperson reiterated that employers are, and will continue to be, responsible for providing a safe and healthy workplace and that OSHA’s pre-existing standards remain in place and enforceable, as appropriate, to protect workers from coronavirus.
 What has OSHA done in the past?
 As part of answering the meat-processing plant worker’s question, Biden pointed to his experience during the Obama administration with the H1N1 pandemic in comparison to the current coronavirus response. To be clear, OSHA did not issue an emergency standard then, either. But the agency did offer detailed guidance — almost twice as long as the COVID-19 enforcement document — on how to protect workers from H1N1.
 And, though the H1N1-specific issues raised in the directive also were not enforceable, the document included specific instructions for inspectors on how to use existing agency standards to identify H1N1-related safety hazards in workplaces.
 For example, the instructions included seven bullet points outlining situations specific to H1N1 in which a citation could be issued under the agency’s general respiratory protection standard. In contrast, the COVID-19 enforcement document does not give the same level of guidance.
 Our ruling
 Biden said that OSHA was not enforcing coronavirus guidelines until the week of April 13, and since then, the agency has not told employers what rules they must implement to keep workplaces safe.
 It’s true that OSHA did not release any COVID-19 enforcement instructions for its inspectors until April 13. However, even when this directive was issued, it told inspectors to focus on its existing general safety standards, not recommendations geared toward the current outbreak. In other words, the coronavirus guidelines are not currently being enforced by OSHA.
 And while the agency’s April 13 enforcement directive instructs inspectors to focus on general safety standards, it does not guide them on how specific recommendations for COVID-19 — for instance, requiring masks and encouraging hand-washing — fit into such efforts.
 We rate Biden’s claim True.
 This story was updated to include comments from an OSHA spokesperson that came after the fact check was posted.
Masks have once again become a political volleyball in the Wisconsin State Capitol.
 Assembly Republicans voted on Feb. 4, 2021 to overturn Gov. Tony Evers’ order requiring people to wear face coverings to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 — sealing the deal after the Senate took action a week prior. Evers responded by immediately issuing a new mandate. 
 The next day, Democrats in the Assembly introduced legislation requiring masks, a measure that is likely to go nowhere in the GOP-controlled Legislature.
 Amid the back and forth, Democrats chastised their Republican colleagues for playing politics with public health and argued masks are necessary to push the state through the final stages of the pandemic.
 Among those to speak out was Assembly Minority Leader Gordon Hintz.
 "At the end of the day we know mask mandates work," the Oshkosh Democrat said in a Feb. 5, 2021 interview on the Wisconsin Public Television program Here & Now. "There’s enough evidence out there between counties that have done it and counties that haven’t."
 Is Hintz onto something? Let’s take a look.
 Mask mandates in Kansas 
 When asked for evidence to support Hintz’s claim, his office pointed to a study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Kansas Department of Health and Environment that analyzed the impact of mask mandates on Kansas counties.
 Kansas’ governor issued an executive order requiring face coverings in public spaces starting July 3, 2020. A state law enacted the month prior allowed counties to opt out of the state mandate, which 81 of 105 did without implementing their own mask rules. 
 Researchers found the seven-day rolling average of new daily cases per 100,000 people decreased by 6% in the 24 counties with mask mandates after the governor’s order. In counties without a mandate, COVID-19 incidence increased by 100%. 
 The study noted that 13 counties with mask mandates and seven counties without mandates also had other mitigation strategies in place, such as limiting the size of gatherings and how many could eat in restaurants. Still, researchers concluded that "strategies related to mask use mandates appear to be important."
 "The decrease in cases among mandated counties and the continued increase in cases in nonmandated counties adds to the evidence supporting the importance of wearing masks and implementing policies requiring their use to mitigate the spread of SARS-CoV-2," the study stated.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Additional research 
 The Wisconsin Medical Society cited the Kansas study in a Feb. 1, 2021 memo to Assembly lawmakers asking them to oppose the repeal. 
 The group also referenced research from Goldman Sachs estimating that mandates gradually increase the number of people who "always" or "frequently" wear masks by about 25 percentage points, and the number who "always" wear masks by 40 points.
 Another study published in June 2020 found a "significant decline" in daily COVID-19 cases in states with mask mandates, with the effect increasing over time. Researchers cautiously estimated that 230,000 to 450,000 COVID-19 cases may have been averted by May 22, 2020 due to the mandates. 
 Meanwhile, researchers in Canada found a 25 to 46% average weekly reduction in new cases in the first few weeks after mandates were adopted, while the number of people who reported always wearing a mask in public increased by about 30 percentage points. 
 When studying the impact of mask mandates, it’s important to consider whether people follow them and if they’re enforced, said Ajay Sethi, an epidemiologist and associate professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He said it can be difficult to assess mandates individually when they’re issued with other public health guidelines, but he believes the Kansas study offered compelling data on the matter. 
 "You could argue that with or without a mandate, people might wear a mask because that’s what they do and the mandate is just confirming what they do," he said. "At the end of the day, an entire county had fewer cases."
 And ultimately, Sethi said, mandates remind people about the importance of wearing face coverings to guard against COVID-19. 
 "If we didn’t have mandates, would you expect mask use to go up?" he said. "I wouldn’t."
 Our ruling
 In a TV interview, Hintz said, "At the end of the day we know mask mandates work. There’s enough evidence out there between counties that have done it and counties that haven’t."
 Multiple studies have suggested mask mandates can lead to a decline in COVID-19 cases. Researchers caution that factors like compliance and enforcement should be taken into consideration, but masks have ultimately proven to be an effective tool in combating the virus. 
 We rate Hintz’s claim True.
Specifics have been hard to come by in this pandemic.
 We don’t know how many people are infected, how fast the coronavirus is spreading or how long we may need to quarantine.
 So the first study to project a date when each state’s cases would peak drew a lot of interest -- especially since Wisconsin jumped off the virtual page.
 The study, released March 26, 2020, said cases wouldn’t peak in Wisconsin until May 22, 2020 — a month later than most states, and nearly two weeks later than any other state in the nation.
 The date went viral. News outlets across the state picked it up, and one writeup of the story from Madison365.com received nearly 40,000 comments, reactions and shares on Facebook in a day.
 And then the study changed.
 An updated analysis posted four days after the original study moved Wisconsin’s projected peak by almost a month to April 26, 2020.
 So what’s up with the shift? Which date is right?
 This post, when the study offered a May peak, was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Here’s what we found.
 The original study
 The analysis from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation — an independent research center based at the University of Washington — developed a model projecting coronavirus growth across the United States for the next four months.
 It projects deaths as well as a variety of measures of hospital utilization — beds used, intensive care unit days and ventilators days used. That estimate was based on COVID-19 deaths so far, data on hospital capacity and use and more detailed coronavirus hospitalization data available in some localities.
 The institute estimates the pandemic would peak nationally around mid-April and result in more than 80,000 deaths, a summary of the study said.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The state-by-state projections were based on a statistical model — essentially a detailed formula that projects the future virus spread based on death rates and other data available to this point.
 And those projections moved a lot after the initial release.
 The update
 Four days after the original publication, on March 30, 2020, researchers added 1,730 nationwide deaths to the model and tweaked the methodology. They said the updates created more precise estimates
 The updated projections changed the estimated peak for all but four states. Wisconsin moved the most, to 26 days earlier, but several others saw dramatic shifts as well. Maryland’s estimated peak moved to 25 days later, Missouri to 21 days later and Idaho to 13 days sooner.
 Ali Mokdad, a senior faculty member at the institute, told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel the original model – started around the beginning of March – assumed Wisconsin would have a Safer at Home-style order in place about two weeks sooner than it did. Gov. Tony Evers issued the order banning all but essential services and travel on March 24, 2020.
 The update factors in that actual date along with additional death data, which dramatically changed the model’s analysis of the state.
 The new projected peak for Wisconsin, April 26, 2020, is still later than what state health officials are saying. Wisconsin Department of Health Services Secretary Andrea Palm said March 30, 2020, the state expected the curve to begin flattening (i.e. peaking) in about 10 days.
 "It’ll be a couple of weeks before we start to really understand how well we are doing, social distancing, safer at home, to really judge ourselves against the worst case models," Palm said in a media briefing with Evers and other officials. "We really do believe it’s another 10-plus days before we are going to be able to see evidence of a flattening off of the new daily cases."
 The viral story from Madison365.com quickly updated to reflect the new numbers, so Facebook posts of that story shared before or after that update now show a headline that accurately references the new April 26 peak.
 Instead of being the latest peak in the country, Wisconsin is now right in the middle of the pack – tied for 20th-latest with three other states. The peak is two weeks after the projected national peak of April 15, 2020.
 Our ruling
 Facebook posts now circulating say Wisconsin will hit the peak for coronavirus cases on April 26.
 That gives us an unusual fact check, since at the time most of those stories were shared, the post referenced a May 22 date that is no longer the best estimate from this study. But Facebook’s design updates a linked story when the story is updated.
 We aren’t getting into whether this is an accurate model, since it’s a prediction of the future and there’s no way to say for sure. But we can examine the accuracy of the Facebook post itself.
 What is currently online in this viral post is an accurate reflection of the study, albeit one that requires a bit of extra context to understand the genesis of the current figures.
 We rate this Mostly True.
A viral image goes too far in lamenting New York City’s new requirement to show proof of COVID-19 vaccination.
 The image says:
 "Ok so let me understand this. I will need to show proof to do anything indoors in NYC but NOT when I vote? you're getting played people!!! Wake up! Little sheeple."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 By order of Mayor Bill de Blasio, starting Aug. 16, people will be required to provide proof of COVID-19 vaccination for indoor dining, indoor fitness, and indoor entertainment and performances. The order requires at least one dose of vaccination for patrons and employees of those establishments.
 The order is limited to those three types of indoor venues. It does not apply, for example, to grocery stores and other essential businesses, though the city will consider adding other types of businesses, de Blasio said.
 It’s the first such order in the U.S., according to the New York Times.
 De Blasio said in announcing his order that he targeted those venues to persuade more people to get vaccinated.
 "It's time for people to see vaccination as literally necessary to living a good and full and healthy life," he said.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 More than 72% of New York City adults have received at least one dose, according to the city.
 As for voting, registered voters in New York State do not need to show identification to vote, unless they did not provide identification with their registration. First-time voters must provide identification information either on or with their voter registration application.
 The proof of vaccination requirement does not apply to polling places.
 The same day as de Blasio’s announcement, Sen. Kevin Cramer, R-N.D., announced he would introduce legislation to require states that mandate vaccine passports, or cards showing proof of vaccination, also mandate voter identification.
 "If states that take federal money for elections feel the need to make residents verify a piece of information as private as their vaccination status just to return to normalcy, then they should have no problem requiring people to prove they are who they say they are when they go to vote," he said in a statement.
 Our ruling
 A viral image claimed that "I will need to show proof to do anything indoors in" New York City, "but not when I vote?"
 In New York State, including New York City, you don’t need to show identification to vote — if you are a registered voter. And proof of vaccination is not required to vote.
 But the claim about "anything indoors" is inaccurate. Starting Aug. 16, the city will require customers and employees to show proof of COVID-19 vaccination in order to enter certain venues — for indoor dining, indoor fitness, and indoor entertainment and performances. But the mayor’s order does not include other types of indoor venues.
 We rate the post Half True.
 RELATED: As extremes shape voter ID debate, the rules keep getting stricter
Hospitals are preparing for an influx of patients as the novel coronavirus spreads across the U.S.
 With that in mind, North Carolina state Sen. Jeff Jackson has tried to keep his constituents informed by posting on social media.
 Jackson, a Mecklenburg County Democrat, regularly tweets stats about the pandemic. And on March 19, he urged people to reschedule elective procedures to free up space for coronavirus patients.
 "Hospitals are starting to cancel elective surgeries and doing their best to empty hospital beds to prepare for a surge. Our hospital beds are typically 85% full across the state. If we don't significantly reduce that number within the next week, that's a major problem," Jackson tweeted.
 Is it true that, under normal circumstances, hospitals operate at 85% capacity?
 We couldn’t find a supporting number. But we did learn that it’s normal for NC hospitals to treat patients while their facilities are close to being full.
 Accustomed to high capacity
 We reached out to Jackson about his tweet. He said he heard the figure from officials with North Carolina’s Department of Health and Human Services. So we reached out to them.
 DHHS spokeswoman SarahLewis Peel responded by email, but didn’t give an exact number.
 "On any given day, our hospitals — by design — operate at 90 to 100% capacity. That’s why we have sought waivers to allow critical access hospitals to operate above their licensed capacity," Peel wrote.
 DHHS later clarified that those numbers are usually during flu season and that evidence is anecdotal. It’s from speaking with hospital managers and suppliers.
 David Weber, the associate chief medical officer at UNC Health, told NC Health News something similar. He said that, with the closure and downsizing of many rural hospitals, there are fewer beds overall across the state.
 "The U.S., compared to years ago, has less open beds and on a normal busy week, you know, most of our hospitals, including UNC, would be running between 90 and 100% occupancy," he said.
 However, we need hard numbers -- not anecdotes -- to get the most accurate picture. 
 Other estimates
 So, what stats are available? The North Carolina Health Association had a lower estimate, but its latest figures are from 2018.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cynthia Charles, the association’s vice president for communications, pointed to statistics from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In 2015, the average US hospital occupancy rate was 65.5 percent.
 "For North Carolina, (the) average hospital occupancy rate is 61% for 2018," she said.
 Other estimates PolitiFact found put the average occupancy rate in the 60-to-75 percent range.
 Charles noted that people may get different estimates depending on how they account for beds, among other things.
 "There could be a difference in how they’re defining capacity, for example whether they are looking at licensed vs. staffed beds, or whether they are considering ‘current state’ staffing as capacity," she said.
 Bigger hospitals, fuller spaces
 Mark Holmes, director of UNC’s Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research, agreed with Charles. Holmes said there are different ways to count beds and averages. Staffing levels could also come into play, he said.
 Holmes and his colleagues recently analyzed cost reports filed to Medicare in 2018. Those numbers suggested a 58% occupancy average, he said. It’s likely that some small, rural hospitals bring down the statewide average.
 "Some of our smaller hospitals are at less than 20%," he said. "But larger ones — like Duke and UNC— are indeed at 85% on average throughout the year."
 The Sheps Center recently published a study of NC hospital occupancy rates.
 Important final point: hospital capacity should not be viewed as the sole indicator of whether it can continue treating patients, Holmes said.
 Hospitals need four things to properly treat patients, he said:
 
 square feet 
 a license from the government
 equipment (including beds), and 
 qualified staff. 
 
 Hospitals may face limits in terms of square footage, Holmes said. But some government agencies are relaxing those regulations and hospitals are creating space where they can, such as dormitories.
 Indeed, Weber said UNC Health is shifting its units around and even using tents outside to triage and treat people with ailments that aren’t as serious as COVID-19.
 "So the square feet and licenses are less important than, in general, the attention they often receive," Holmes said in an email. "Most people who study this issue think the biggest limitations to capacity are equipment— e.g. ventilators — and qualified staff, especially as the epidemic infects staff and their family members."
 Our ruling
 Jackson said North Carolina’s hospital beds "are typically 85% full across the state."
 The way he worded his tweet makes it seems like all hospitals are usually at 85% capacity. That’s not right. It depends on the hospital and it depends on the season. 
 But he has a point that many of North Carolina’s hospitals routinely treat patients while their facilities are close to maximum capacity. So we rate his claim Half True.
A viral post on Reddit shows a dramatic photo of two people lying on the ground sick with COVID-19 seeking treatment. One appears curled against a wall, while another patient draped with a paper medical gown is curled up, face down.
 "Everyone please be careful — whether you are vaccinated or not," wrote Suzanne Lopez on Reddit where she posted the photo taken by her husband Louie. "My husband (vaccinated, but positive) has been waiting 2+ hours for monoclonal therapy and he says he has never seen people so sick. Moaning, crying, unable to move."
 
 The Reddit thread drew hundreds of comments about the spread of COVID-19 in Florida, which has experienced a spike in cases this summer.
 "I hate to see it, and I hate to say it, but we need more pictures like this showing the reality of the situation," wrote one Reddit user.
 The idea that, more than one year into the pandemic, COVID-19 patients in a major city in Florida would be lying on a floor moaning for help seemed improbable. But it’s real, according to city and state officials.
 
 Photo was taken at Jacksonville Regeneron site
 The photo was taken at one of multiple state-supported sites that opened in August to provide monoclonal antibody treatments that help COVID-19 patients avoid hospitalization or death.
 Nikki Kimbleton, a spokesperson for the city of Jacksonville, said in a written statement to PolitiFact that the volume of patients seeking the treatment more than doubled in recent days at the Jacksonville clinic, which is located at a public library. While the site provided 43 doses on Aug. 16, that rose in the following days to 97, 143 and 155. 
 Once the city realized the increase in patients seeking treatment, the city made sure the clinic had adequate supplies, including more wheelchairs, seats for patients waiting in line and signs directing patients to alert someone if they need assistance.
 Louie Lopez, who took the photo, told PolitiFact that he was vaccinated in the spring. But about a week ago he came down with symptoms of nasal congestion and a headache and then tested positive for COVID-19. Lopez said his physician advised him to take Regeneron, so he signed up for an appointment. 
 Lopez told PolitiFact he saw only a couple of chairs at the appointment site. He said that while he was waiting in line for his appointment, other people arrived including the two women in the photo. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He said the woman in the yellow dress "was in the worst shape — she was moaning and in pain, and it was freezing in there. They brought one of those paper gowns and covered her up. She was just laying there," Lopez said. Lopez said he didn’t time the events precisely, but estimated the women were on the floor for about an hour. Later, clinic staff put the two women into wheelchairs. 
 City and state officials sent us a TV news report by News4Jax, which included an interview with Toma Dean, the woman lying face down on the floor.
 Dean, of Fleming Island, told News4Jax, that she was not vaccinated, and said that she had been suffering with COVID-19 and pneumonia for two weeks. An emergency room doctor had advised her to get the monoclonal antibody treatment. 
 Dean described herself as in "very bad shape, light-headed, dizzy, shortness of breath. I couldn’t stand at all." She told News4Jax that the staff at the library were excellent and scrambled to get wheelchairs. Dean’s voice in the TV interview showed she was still sick, but she said she felt better after the treatment. (PolitiFact was unable to reach Dean directly.)
 "This is real, guys," Dean told News4Jax. "If you have it, I advise you to go get this therapy. Go take advantage of the resources out there. Get vaccinated. It may not be the first thing that you want to do, but it's better than the end result."
 DeSantis has set up sites for Regeneron across Florida
 In November, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency use authorization to Tarrytown, N.Y.-based Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. for Regeneron to treat mild to moderate COVID-19. The product consists of two monoclonal antibodies, which are laboratory-made proteins that mimic the immune system’s ability to fight off harmful pathogens such as viruses.
 On Aug. 10, 2021, the FDA revised the authorization, allowing for emergency use of Regeneron as a preventive drug for people who are exposed to the virus and are at high risk of developing severe COVID-19. The agency said the treatment is not a substitute for vaccination. 
 Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis has urged people to take the drug, which was used by former President Donald Trump after he became infected. Both vaccines and Regeneron are free for Floridians. 
 The state of Florida has ordered more than 7,000 doses in total from the federal government, said Weesam Khoury, a state health department spokesperson.
 Our ruling
 A photo shows two COVID-19 patients lying on the floor seeking treatment in Florida. City and state officials confirmed that the photo was taken at a state-supported site in Jacksonville where Floridians can get a free Regeneron treatment.
 The photo was taken by another patient as he waited in line for his appointment during a week that saw a rapid increase in patients showing up to receive treatment. More chairs and wheelchairs and signs have since been added at the site. 
 This image is real. We rate this statement True.
A new Trump administration directive targeting international students at U.S. colleges is being challenged by universities in court — and by pundits on the cable news channels.
 The new Immigration and Customs Enforcement guidance would bar foreign college students from staying in the country if they take all their courses online.
 International students enrolled at Harvard University and other U.S. colleges that have moved fall-semester classes entirely online due to the coronavirus pandemic will have to leave the U.S. or transfer to a school with in-person teaching, according to the new rule.
 The rule, if put into effect, could trim the number of foreign students in the U.S. and at specific universities. It could also deal a blow to the U.S. economy, said MSNBC host Chris Hayes, who argued on his primetime TV show that the policy has "no upside."
 "Higher education is one of America's strongest export sectors," Hayes said, while displaying a chart on U.S. education exports. "Over 1 million international students studied at American universities, (in the) 2018-19 school year. They contributed over $40 billion to the economy."
 Hayes’ statistics are accurate. In 2019, U.S. service exports from education totaled roughly $44 billion, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis. That made education the sixth largest service export for the year, behind services such as personal travel and professional and management consulting, a spokesperson for the International Trade Administration said. 
 Academic experts and representatives from nonprofits focused on international education also backed Hayes’ claims. An ICE spokesperson said Hayes’ statement was accurate but declined to comment further due to pending litigation.
 "Higher education is one of the few areas in which we have a big surplus of exports over imports," said Dick Startz, professor of economics at the University of California, Santa Barbara, who wrote about the economics of education in a 2017 article for the Brookings Institution.
 Education as an export
 All three of the statistics Hayes cited are correct. 
 More than 1 million international students studied at U.S. institutions during the 2018-19 academic year, according to the Institute of International Education and NAFSA: Association of International Educators, two nonprofits dedicated to international education.
 The two organizations reported that those international students contributed more than $40 billion to the U.S. economy during the year. Experts said higher education can be considered an export because international students pay their tuition and living expenses to colleges and universities using money from abroad.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sean Hannity
 
 
 stated on December 1, 2021 in a TV segment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "If you look pre-COVID" under President Donald Trump, "we didn't import a single barrel of oil from Saudi Arabia.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Bill McCarthy • December 2, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "International students are buying an American education," Startz said. "Hence it’s an export."
 Exports from education amounted to roughly $44 billion in 2019, up from about $42.6 billion in 2018, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis. That’s more than the U.S. made from exporting many other goods and services in the same timeframe. 
 Education ranked sixth among service exports in 2019, the International Trade Administration spokesperson told us. It was fifth in 2018.
 Those numbers make sense when you factor in the cost of college, said Judith Scott-Clayton, professor of economics and education at Columbia University’s Teachers College.
 "If there are 1.1 million international students in the country, and each of them spends about $40,000 on U.S. tuition and living expenses, that gets you to $44 billion," she said.
 In an email to PolitiFact, Hayes also cited the International Trade Administration and an article in the New York Times Magazine in which an Institute of International Education adviser was quoted saying "higher education is one of America’s biggest exports."
 But the article said U.S. schools were losing their international appeal for a number of reasons, including rising tuition costs and various policies enacted under President Donald Trump.
 Rachel Banks, NAFSA’s senior director for public policy and legislative strategy, said in a statement that new international student enrollment is down over 10% since the fall of 2016, a trend NAFSA estimates has cost the U.S. economy $11.8 billion.
 "That’s before the impacts of a global pandemic and related travel restrictions, several presidential proclamations targeting immigrants and nonimmigrants, and this guidance," Banks said. "Therefore, we don’t anticipate this downward trajectory to reverse itself anytime soon."
 Our ruling
 Hayes said, "Higher education is one of America's strongest export sectors. Over 1 million international students studied at American universities, 2018-19 school year. They contributed over $40 billion to the economy."
 Government agencies, academic experts and nonprofit organizations said Hayes’ statistics are correct. The money the U.S. gets from foreign students studying at its colleges and universities makes education one of the country’s top service exports.
 We rate this statement True.
As COVID-19 cases continue to climb, front-line health care workers are decrying unsafe working conditions — in particular, describing inadequate access to personal protective equipment, or PPE. Many hospitals and state lawmakers blame Washington, saying the Trump administration has not done enough to make this critical protective gear available. 
 But at a recent press conference, President Donald Trump suggested those claims are overblown, asserting instead that hospitals have the tools they need to sanitize and reuse protective facewear.
 "We’re also using a sterilization process ― some great equipment that will sterilize masks up to 20 times per mask. So that’s like ordering 20 times more masks. And it’s working very well," Trump said at the April 23 briefing.
 
 In fact, the question of reusing masks — specifically, the highly effective N95 respirators that best protect wearers from COVID-19 ― has emerged as a major worker-safety concern. Traditionally, the masks have been designated only for single use.
 But with hospitals running low on protective equipment, many seek to stretch their supplies.
 With that context, we were curious — can N95s be sterilized and reused, as Trump suggested? And if so, are disinfected masks as protective as new ones?
 We contacted the White House but never heard back. Our own research revealed the situation is more complex than Trump suggested. Hospitals are using new technology to sterilize masks. Some procedures do show promise. Still, according to experts we consulted, it’s an overstatement to suggest they are as effective as getting new equipment.
 The Battelle process
 Trump appears to be referencing technology from the Battelle Memorial Institute, a nonprofit technology company in Ohio. Battelle, which has an in-house "critical care decontamination system," received emergency authorization from the Food and Drug Administration to sanitize N95s for reuse.
 Hospitals send used N95s to Battelle, which has also set up N95 sanitization centers in coronavirus hot spots, including New York, Boston, Seattle and Washington, D.C.
 Workers wearing protective gear load the respirators into a sealed container. Masks are cleaned with vapor-phase hydrogen peroxide, aerated and then sent back to the originating hospitals. The decontamination process takes about 12 hours. A mask’s round-trip journey from a hospital to Battelle in Ohio and back again can take about 10 days.
 Battelle said masks can withstand the decontamination process up to 20 times without losing their ability to filter out viral particles.
 So, the president is right that this technology exists. But is it fair to say the approach is the equivalent of buying new gear?
 Put simply, no. Experts are clear that decontamination works in the current emergency. But ― despite Trump’s enthusiasm — it is not a best practice.
 "It’s not accurate to say that reprocessing respirators is as good as purchasing 20 of them," said Dr. Patrick Kenney, medical director of Yale-New Haven Health’s supply chain, who has also researched decontamination technology and processing. "This is not a renewable resource. The respirators are intended for single use."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In fact, in its letter designating emergency approval, the FDA specified that Battelle’s decontamination system "may be effective" at protecting wearers but advised it specifically for "when there are insufficient supplies." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also recommends reuse "only be practiced as a crisis capacity strategy."
 The reasons are multiple. For one thing, research is limited on how effective this type of decontamination is. Also, masks vary in how they stand up to the procedure.
 And it’s not as simple as doing a load of laundry. "Decontamination is a complicated process," said Hana El-Samad, a professor of biochemistry and biophysics at the University of California-San Francisco, who researches N95 sanitization. "Assessing how well it works and which N95 makes and models remain unaffected is an area of active research," she said. 
 N95Decon, a research collaborative with which El-Samad works, has examined Battelle’s hydrogen peroxide approach and found the chemicals appear to eliminate COVID-19 spores without damaging the mask’s filtration.
 Mask integrity
 Performance is only part of the equation. Another is mask structure: N95s work only when properly fitted to the face.
 When workers reuse and re-wear the masks, they can lose their shape, which undermines the quality of fit and renders them less protective. For some masks, per an N95 report on hydrogen peroxide, fit quality declined substantially after just five uses. For others, it took 15 wears to see a meaningful difference.
 At Yale-New Haven, Kenney said, the hospital discards 20% to 30% of respirators that could have been refurbished before they hit the 20-reuse mark because they had sustained too much wear and tear. Battelle’s 20-time reusability metric, he added, was calculated without factoring in the impact of regular hospital use.
 In addition, decontamination itself can in some cases worsen the respirator’s fit. 
 "If [an N95] doesn’t fit well, then air will leak around the sides and it doesn’t matter how good a filter it is," Kenney said.
 Plus, using this technology requires hospitals to have other protocols in place. Used masks must be safely collected ― since they could be COVID-contaminated and pose a biohazard — and a plan must be in place to move them to and from the sanitization facility. 
 "These are all complicated processes that need to be done right," El-Samad said.
 She offered a key takeaway: Technology like Battelle’s can help. But nothing substitutes for new N95s.
 Our ruling
 In describing ongoing efforts to reuse protective respirators, Trump said the United States is using "some great equipment that will sterilize masks up to 20 times per mask." That, he argued, "is like ordering 20 times more masks."
 It is true that technology exists to sterilize N95s up to 20 times. But there are knowledge gaps and other shortcomings that limit how effective this process is. Government authorities and health care researchers are clear that this is a crisis measure and it is in no way as effective as "ordering 20 times more masks."
 The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details that undermine the president’s point. We rate it Half True.
Amid a pandemic that changed almost every part of Wisconsin life in 2020, one thing was nearly constant — inaction from the Republican-led Legislature.
 In October, we rated True a claim that Wisconsin Republicans hadn’t passed a single bill in six months, a streak that ultimately ran through the end of the year. We noted Wisconsin lawmakers had done less than almost any other state to address the pandemic despite being one of just 10 full-time Legislatures in the nation.
 That streak ended in February. Republicans passed a $100 million COVID response bill that was vetoed by Democratic Gov. Tony Evers, but the two sides came together later that month on a bill that overhauled the state unemployment system while also expanding jobless benefits and protecting businesses and governments from coronavirus-related lawsuits.
 A month later, Evers took aim at the Republicans’ pandemic record while pitching his plan to spend $3.2 billion in new federal coronavirus aid.
 "It took the Legislature nearly 300 days to act on a #COVID19 bill during this pandemic," Evers tweeted on March 30, 2021. "We simply cannot afford to waste any time or let Republicans play politics and prevent these funds from going to folks who need our help."
 Let’s take a closer look at that 300 days claim.
 Multiple ways to read it
 The key question is how one interprets Evers’ reference, which is imprecise.
 Many would no doubt take this statement to mean the Legislature didn’t pass a COVID-19 bill for the first 300 days of the pandemic. And that’s inaccurate.
 RELATED: Steineke’s actions, words don’t match on COVID-19 bill
 Evers imposed his "Safer at Home" order on March 25, 2020, and within weeks the Legislature passed a broad COVID-19 relief bill that Evers signed on April 15, 2020.
 That bill:
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Made workers’ compensation available to healthcare workers who contracted COVID-19 (though controversially only if they could prove they were exposed while working on a person with the virus)
 
 
 Suspended the one-week waiting period before people who are out of work may collect unemployment benefits
 
 
 Provided insurance protection for those infected with coronavirus and shielded health care providers from liability
 
 
 Barred insurers from charging people more to get COVID-19 treatment out of network
 
 
 Required insurers to cover coronavirus testing for free
 
 
 That bill, however, was the last coronavirus-related action the Legislature passed for about 300 days. That’s the point Evers was making, said spokeswoman Britt Cudaback.
 "The tweet says a COVID-19 bill because it did, in fact, take the Legislature nearly 300 days to pass a COVID-19 bill, and not for lack of the governor’s or public’s urging to pass it sooner," Cudaback said in an email.
 The phrasing could also be taken to say the Legislature stalled a particular bill for 300 days, which is also inaccurate. Evers raised a variety of potential bills during that legislative drought, but no specific bill that was ignored for that length of time.
 Sinec February 2021, the Legislature has passed several other COVID-related bills, including measures that allowed pharmacy technicians, pharmacy students and dentists to administer the vaccine.
 Our ruling
 Evers said, "It took the Legislature nearly 300 days to act on a (COVID-19) bill during this pandemic."
 It didn’t take 300 days for the Legislature to take any action on the pandemic, as a wide-ranging bill was signed into law in April 2020. But the Republican-run Senate and Assembly did take a 300-day hiatus from passing legislation after that point, which stretched all the way to February 2021.
 That lines up with our definition of Half True: a statement that is "partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context."
After failing to stop the $1.9 trillion COVID-19 stimulus package from becoming law, Republicans are blasting the plan as a bailout for poorly managed Democratic states and cities.
 A key piece of the criticism has been the stipulation that $350 billion be siphoned off for state and local governments, money Democrats who pushed through the legislation with no Republican support argue will blunt the pandemic’s fiscal fallout.
 Rep. Mike Bost, a Republican from Murphysboro in southwestern Illinois, joined the national GOP chorus when in a WJPF radio interview he claimed there was nothing in the legislation limiting how states can spend the money.
 "Where are the checks and balances in the issuing of these funds? Where is it that in there it says, it can only be used for A, B, C and D? It does not," Bost said. "And that’s the problem."
 The law — dubbed the "American Rescue Plan" by President Joe Biden — is more flexible than previous aid packages in how money can be spent, experts told us. But it’s also not a free-for-all.
 More leeway, but some limits
 A relief bill passed last year, when Republicans controlled the White House and the U.S. Congress, earmarked $150 billion in state and local government aid for expenses tied only to the public health emergency. After last year’s law — dubbed the CARES Act — took effect, guidance from the federal Department of the Treasury explained funds could go beyond direct health care spending to cover items such as payroll for first responders and costs associated with caring for the homeless community.
 The text of the latest aid package sets more flexible guidelines, allowing state and local governments to spend on the pandemic’s "negative economic impacts." According to the language of the new law, funds can go toward increased pay for essential workers, preventing cuts to government services, and making investments in water, sewer, or broadband infrastructure as well. And unlike the 2020 CARES Act, it covers costs incurred through 2024.
 Bost spokesperson Alex Naughton, responding to our inquiry in an email, said the Democrats’ package lacks "any meaningful guardrails" for how state and local governments can spend the funds.
 "They so loosely defined the terms of what’s an acceptable use of funds … that literally almost any expense could qualify," Naughton said. "This effectively creates a slush fund to use on whatever they want, as long as they paste a ‘pandemic response’ label on the package first."
 Experts agreed the new law provides considerable leeway, but they added that it does set some limits and outlines penalties for states and municipalities if they go beyond the legislation’s parameters.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Specifically, state and local governments can’t use funds to make pension payments or offset lost revenue from state and local tax cuts enacted since March 3, 2021.
 In Illinois, the pension fund prohibition is particularly relevant given the state’s struggle to meet its pension obligations. Last April, Democratic state Senate President Don Harmon attracted national media coverage when he sent a letter to Illinois’ congressional delegation requesting $10 billion to help shore up the underfunded pension funds.
 The prohibition on direct pension spending doesn’t rule out the possibility the federal aid could free up other state money to shift toward pensions. Audit provisions in the law, however, spell out how states would have to return the money if they violate the spending restrictions.
 "If something is found to be outside the scope of the program, the [state or local] government's on the hook to pay that back," said Amanda Kass, associate director of the Government Finance Research Center at the University of Illinois-Chicago’s College of Urban Planning and Public Affairs.
 Our ruling
 Bost said the American Rescue Plan "does not" include "checks and balances" on how state and local government funds can be spent.
 Experts agreed the package is more permissive than previous state and local relief. It allows spending not only on public health but also on the economic impact of the pandemic as well as government services and infrastructure.
 But it still contains two big restrictions: the money cannot pay down pensions or fill in holes created by tax cuts. State and local governments also have to report how they spend the funds, and if they are found in violation must pay the money back.
 We rate Bost’s claim Half True.
 
 HALF TRUE – The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context.
 Click here for more on the six PolitiFact ratings and how we select facts to check.
Skeptics of the COVID-19 vaccines have often seized on reports of breakthrough infections, — when vaccinated people contract the virus — to cast doubt on the vaccines’ effectiveness.
 A recent Facebook post fits that pattern. The Aug. 12 post is a screenshot of a tweet from a user named Melissa Tate, in which she claims sailors aboard a British naval ship were infected with COVID-19 despite being vaccinated.
 "100 sailors isolated at sea. All vaxxed. All with COVID 7 weeks following deployment," the tweet reads.
 Tate, a conservative author who has shared pandemic-related misinformation, also includes a link to a BBC News story about the COVID-19 outbreak with her tweet. 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Both the tweet from Tate and the BBC story are real, and the description of the incident is accurate. But they leave out important context about the situation. 
 The Royal Navy’s aircraft carrier HMS Queen Elizabeth was about seven weeks into a 28-week deployment with several other ships when the navy announced 100 cases of the virus were discovered on the ship during routine testing around July 4, according to the BBC. Positive cases were also found on other ships in the fleet.
 Around 3,700 crew members are part of the fleet, with about 1,600 people serving on the aircraft carrier.
 None of the infected sailors developed any serious symptoms from the virus or have been hospitalized.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Our crew are double vaccinated, so you'll be glad to know there is no serious effects on any of the crew, and we will manage it," Ben Wallace, the United Kingdom’s defense secretary, said in a July 13 press conference, the Independent reported.
 The positive cases did not affect the fleet's deployment, according to France 24. The Royal Navy implemented safety precautions such as face coverings, physical distancing and contact tracing to help curb the outbreak's spread.
 Although Wallace did not say which type of vaccine sailors received, the Moderna, Pfizer and AstraZeneca vaccines are currently authorized for use in the United Kingdom.
 Studies have shown the COVID-19 vaccines are highly effective at protecting people against the virus, although recent research suggests the delta variant of the virus has diminished the protection somewhat. No vaccine has been shown to be 100% effective, and breakthrough infections do occur. In those cases, studies continue to show that vaccination significantly reduces the risk of severe illness, hospitalization and death.
 Recent data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show that, of the more than 166 million people who have been fully vaccinated in the United States, there were 8,054 people — a tiny fraction of 1% — with breakthrough COVID-19 infections who were hospitalized or died. About three-quarters of them were 65 or older. Not all the hospitalizations or deaths were related to COVID.
 The CDC says that because its monitoring depends in part on passive and voluntary reporting — and only 49 states and territories report their data to the CDC — the figures are likely an undercount and may not be completely representative of all breakthrough infections in the country.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post reshared a tweet claiming 100 sailors aboard a British naval ship contracted COVID-19 despite being fully vaccinated against the virus. 
 That did happen, and such breakthrough infections are expected. The 100 sailors were among a crew of 1,600 on an aircraft carrier. None of the infected sailors developed any serious symptoms or were hospitalized; the cases were discovered during routine testing. 
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
Accusations about the responsible party behind the United States’ struggle to accelerate coronavirus testing have come from every which way and the blame has fallen, often inaccurately, on the shoulders of different public officials.
 In a March 13 tweet, President Donald Trump said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention studied its testing system for decades but wasn’t prepared for a large scale pandemic, an issue that was complicated by policy changes made by former President Barack Obama. 
 U.S. Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., retweeted Trump’s remark and added his own comment: "Trump is once again trying to blame the previous administration for the number of tests available. This is his #DailyLie." 
 U.S. Rep. Dan Crenshaw, R-Houston, retweeted Schumer’s remark and said: "It’s not Obama’s fault and it’s not Trump’s fault. We have stringent FDA regulations, long in place, that created barriers to the private industry creating a test quickly."
 PolitiFact looked at a different Trump claim blaming Obama for a lack of testing and rated it False. We also looked at a Mostly False claim from Democrat Joe Biden about the Trump administration rejecting tests from the World Health Organization (they were never offered). Trump also inaccurately stated that any individual who wants to be tested for the coronavirus can get a test — we rated that statement Pants on Fire.
 We wanted to dig deeper into Crenshaw’s claim, which attributes the delays in the availability of widespread testing to Food and Drug Administration regulations.
 Justin Discigil, spokesman for Crenshaw, pointed to articles from ProPublica, the New Yorker, The Atlantic and the Washington Post, all of which highlighted the role FDA regulations played here.
 He added: "Just to be clear – nowhere did we say that these regulations were the sole/only reason for the testing issue, we said that they created barriers."
 A timeline of events
 The first confirmed case of COVID-19 in the United States came at the end of January, when a man in Washington state developed symptoms after returning from a trip to Wuhan. 
 One month later, federal health officials at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said it was inevitable that the U.S. would experience a spread of the virus and urged people to take precautions.
 In these early days of the virus, tests were not widely distributed to local and state laboratories. Instead, testing for the new coronavirus was conducted almost entirely by the CDC — samples collected at the local level were sent to the agency.
 Initial test kits developed by the CDC for use in local and state labs were flawed and produced inaccurate results in some labs, meaning they couldn’t be distributed. As the agency worked to correct the tests, health officials turned to the FDA. 
 The U.S. Association of Public Health Laboratories submitted a letter asking the agency to use "enforcement discretion" and authorize local and state labs to develop and use their own tests.
 During a public health emergency, labs and drug manufacturers must seek an Emergency Use Authorization from the FDA to use diagnostic tests and medical treatments that have not gone through the typical clearance process — to share them faster in the emergency.
 (These authorizations were begun in 2004 under President George W. Bush.)
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For laboratory-developed tests, like the ones in question, FDA policy has stated that they cannot be used in clinical diagnoses without the FDA’s approval during an emergency. 
 Although the goal of these regulations is to ensure only accurate lab tests are conducted, health officials have said they prevented them from quickly responding to the virus.
 One doctor in a Seattle lab described the process for getting an Emergency Use Authorization from the FDA and said the agency asked for a level of testing that didn’t make sense in the context of an emergency, according to a GQ profile.
 A doctor in North Carolina told NBC News that she had developed a test using the World Health Organization’s protocol but had yet to receive the use authorization from the FDA, putting the state "way behind" in its ability to test patients. 
 On Feb. 29, the FDA announced a change in the process: Labs would still need to seek the agency’s approval for their tests, but the labs could begin testing while waiting for the official green light.
 On March 16, (three days after Crenshaw made his claim) the FDA announced another change to its policies and put state officials in charge of coronavirus tests developed by laboratories in their states, meaning labs would engage with state officials and not the FDA. It also removes the requirement for these labs to apply for an Emergency Use Authorization for their tests.
 The changes also expand which labs and manufacturers are included in FDA guidelines and which kinds of tests can be developed.
 "We believe the unprecedented policy set forth in today’s updated guidance, which addresses laboratories and commercial manufacturers, will help address these urgent public health concerns by helping to expand the number and variety of diagnostic tests, as well as available testing capabilities in health care settings, and reference and commercial laboratories," reads a release from the agency.
 After the changes
 After the FDA announced changes to its policies, Labcorps and Quest Diagnostics both announced plans to start testing for the new coronavirus, crediting changes in federal policy with their ability to do so. 
 "We applaud the FDA for providing the flexibility for innovative, quality lab developed tests to be brought to patients and providers quickly to advance effective response to the coronavirus outbreak," said Steve Rusckowski, chairman and chief executive officer of Quest Diagnostics, in a statement.
 But even as state and local authorities move to ramp up testing, the number of available tests is still lacking. 
 In Austin, for example, there is still a gap between available test kids and demand for testing, as officials prioritize testing for health care workers, people living in nursing homes and people at high risk for complications from the virus.
 Our Ruling
 Crenshaw said in a tweet that longstanding FDA regulations "created barriers to the private industry creating a test quickly" for the coronavirus.
 Crenshaw’s statement is accurate. FDA procedures adopted in 2004 meant laboratories had to seek the agency’s approval before developing and using tests in communities, a policy many health care officials have said prevented the country from taking early action in response to the novel coronavirus.
 It is important to keep in mind that other factors have contributed to the low levels of testing for the virus, beyond the FDA regulations.
 But Crenshaw’s statement is accurate. We rate it True.
House Democrats are forging ahead with a vote on a $1.9 trillion package to address the coronavirus and fix the economic damage that cost about 10 million people their jobs. Rep. Steve Scalise, second in command of the House Republicans, said that he and his colleagues support spending more to overcome the pandemic, but that the Democratic plan is chock full of unneeded giveaways.
 "There's over a trillion dollars of money unspent from previous relief bills that were bipartisan," Scalise, R-La., said Feb. 21 on ABC’s This Week. "The money's still sitting in a bank account and we're going to pass $1.9 trillion of additional spending to bail out failed states, to raise the minimum wage? What does that have to do with COVID?"
 The claim that there is $1 trillion left over from earlier efforts is a top Republican talking point. Scalise led with the same argument in a Feb. 19 op-ed.
 His source is the COVID Money Tracker, a project of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a group focused on reducing federal deficits. The tracker’s latest number shows that out of $4.1 trillion approved by Congress, about $3 trillion has been committed or disbursed.
 But in a Jan. 27 blog post, the budget group warned that figuring out how much money remains is complicated. It’s not, they wrote, as though the money is "sitting in budget accounts waiting to be allocated." 
 "Much of it is already allocated or scheduled to be spent, and a small portion will never be spent," they wrote.
 A large fraction of the nominally unspent money comes from the Response and Relief Act, passed in late December. 
 "These funds will take some time to disburse and even more time to appear in the data," they said. 
 About a fifth of the money that Scalise counted will be spent over several years, primarily in the form of Medicaid dollars and a lending program called Economic Injury and Disaster Loans.
 Part of the uncertainty, the committee’s analysts wrote, is that some of the money allocated in earlier bills might never be spent. For example, the CARES Act that passed in March extended unemployment benefits at an estimated cost of $250 billion. But as of right now, that seems to overshoot the need, they said. The amount of the excess would make Scalise’s $1 trillion number a bit lower.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Setting aside the December relief package, about 80% of previously allocated funds have been spent, they said.
 The federal government has its own COVID-19 relief spending tracker. It counts dollars differently than the one Scalise used, and it hasn’t been updated since the end of December. By its accounting, out of a total of $2.4 trillion that Congress approved, about $500 billion remains unspent and unobligated. 
 If federal dollars go unspent, that might suggest that certain programs need to be redesigned. Molly Reynolds, a senior fellow in governance studies at Brookings, a Washington research group, said it could be that the way Congress set up a program made it too hard for the money to get to the people and businesses that needed help.
 That, however, is a separate question from the size of the relief bill.
 "Ultimately, it may be the case that unspent funds mean that the next package should be smaller, but I don’t think that’s the first conclusion one should necessarily draw from any existence of unspent funds," Reynolds said.
 Even money that Washington has disbursed can be held up at the state level. Massachusetts has spent about half of the $2.7 billion it got through the CARES Act, the Boston Globe reported. Missouri officials left about $13 million for small farms and businesses unused.
 Our ruling
 Scalise said, "There's over a trillion dollars of money unspent from previous relief bills ... still sitting in a bank account."
 Scalise’s point-in-time figure is in line with one running tally, but he oversimplified the status of the funds. A large share of the total is already allocated or scheduled to be spent. A key factor is that Washington is getting up to speed in disbursing funds approved in late December.
 The money is not sitting in budget accounts, but neither has it reached its final destination..
 We rate this claim Half True.
Sen. Pat Toomey this week criticized President Joe Biden’s proposed $1.9 trillion coronavirus relief package, saying the direct payments Biden wants to send Americans are poorly targeted to those most in need. 
 "There will be several thousand dollars in payments going to families with six-figure incomes who’ve had no income interruption whatsoever," Toomey (R., Pa.) said Tuesday during a Senate confirmation hearing for Janet Yellen, Biden’s nominee for Treasury secretary. 
 We wondered just how much such families will receive if Biden’s plan is signed into law. 
 Toomey is right. Married couples making up to $150,000 annually would qualify for $2,800 in new payments, on top of the $1,200 they should have received this month from the relief package then-President Donald Trump signed into law late last year. 
 Together, those payments would total $2,000 per person — the target Democrats in Congress set, Trump made a late and unsuccessful push for, and that Biden is now pursuing from the White House. 
 Individuals making up to $75,000 would qualify for $1,400 in new aid on top of the $600 payments they just got. And adults with dependent children ages 16 and younger would qualify for an additional $600 per child. 
 Analysts estimate this component of Biden’s plan could cost $465 billion. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 During the Senate Finance Committee hearing, which took place the day before Biden’s inauguration, Toomey argued against direct payments for upper middle class families who haven’t endured any loss of income during the pandemic. 
 Yellen acknowledged the payments aren’t designed to target the people hurting the most, but rather intended to support families and stimulate the economy broadly. 
 "Some families presumably don’t greatly need the money, but there are many families who are under stress," Yellen told Toomey. 
 The eligibility criteria for direct payments under Biden’s plan mirrors the one Congress agreed to a few weeks ago, which set the upper income limit for the smallest payments at $174,000 for a married couple. 
 Toomey told Yellen it would be tough to find bipartisan support for Biden’s proposal, but several Senate Republicans have already endorsed the idea, including Marco Rubio of Florida, Josh Hawley of Missouri, and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina. 
 Democrats were first to pitch the idea of $2,000 per person direct payments, but it was Trump who made a late push for them in December, threatening to withhold his support for the relief package unless the payments were included. He eventually relented and signed the package into law without the larger payments. 
 Our ruling 
 Toomey said families with six-figure incomes who’ve had no income interruption will get several thousand dollars in payments under Biden’s coronavirus relief package. That’s right. Couples who make up to $150,000 annually will get $2,800, plus $600 for each child age 16 and under, on top of payments received from the last relief package. We rate the statement True.
The 2019 coronavirus has infected more than 113,000 people in 109 countries. But Dr. Drew Pinsky wants the press to focus more on the flu.
 In a Feb. 3 segment on Daily Blast Live, a live daytime news and entertainment program, Pinsky, an internist and television personality, lambasted press coverage of the coronavirus outbreak. At the time, more than 17,000 people had been infected, almost all in China.
 "The press is overreacting, and it makes me furious," he said. "The press needs to shut up. Because you’re more likely to die of influenza right now."
 Over the following month, the virus spread to 84 other countries, killing thousands of people in the process. But in a follow-up segment March 5, Pinsky doubled down on his comments.
 "As I’ve been saying for the last month, what we should be talking about is flu generally," he said. "There’s 16,000 dead, 280,000 hospitalized in this country from influenza. The message should be: Get your flu shot."
 The Feb. 3 video was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) It has been repurposed into a meme.
 
 Since its outbreak in Wuhan, China, in December, we have fact-checked a slew of social media posts and statements that aim to minimize the threat of the 2019 coronavirus. Some of them falsely claim there is a media-run conspiracy to exaggerate the threat of the virus.
 Is Dr. Drew, whose own show was canceled in 2016 after he speculated about Hillary Clinton’s health, right to say that the flu poses a bigger threat than the coronavirus? Yes and no.
 Coronavirus has a higher mortality rate
 Based solely on the numbers, you’re more likely to die if you get the 2019 coronavirus than if you get the flu. (Several factors apply, such as age and health.)
 As of March 10, 4,012 people around the world had died after being infected with COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus. The death toll in the United States is 28.
 A study of 44,672 confirmed cases of the virus from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention found that about 80% of the cases were mild, but the virus had a fatality rate of 2.3%. A more recent estimate from the World Health Organization puts the number at 3.4%, although that figure is likely inflated given how many cases are mild and not treated in hospitals.
 For comparison, the fatality rate of this year’s strain of the flu is estimated to be between 0.05% and 0.1% in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Between 20,000 and 52,000 have died.
 RELATED: Why it’s hard to estimate the coronavirus death rate this early
 The higher death count for the flu is a result of its prevalence. As of now, the flu is more common in the United States than the coronavirus. So even though it has a lower mortality rate, it kills more people.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "The prevalence of flu is higher at this moment in time," said Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins University’s Center for Health Security. "(But) pound for pound, if you had both viruses, the one that’s more likely to make you die is the coronavirus."
 We reached out to Dr. Drew for comment, but we haven’t heard back.
 Flu poses a bigger risk — for now
 Experts cautioned against minimizing the potential harm of COVID-19.
 As of March 10, there were 647 confirmed cases of the coronavirus in the United States. Meanwhile, the CDC estimates that there were between 34 million and 49 million flu illnesses this season.
 "For most people, the immediate risk of being exposed to the virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to be low," the CDC says in its risk assessment. "This virus is not currently widespread in the United States."
 According to the Chinese CDC study, those most likely to die from the coronavirus were older than 60 and/or had preexisting medical conditions, like hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Men were also more likely than women to die. 
 Those risk factors are pretty similar to those for the flu. Both diseases also spread similarly: through respiratory droplets in coughs and sneezes.
 RELATED: Stop sharing myths about preventing the coronavirus. Here are 4 real ways to protect yourself
 Researchers are still looking into how contagious the 2019 coronavirus is compared with other viruses, at what points it can be transmitted to other people and how common it really is in American communities. That uncertainty makes it hard to draw comparisons between the potential threat of COVID-19 and the current threat of the flu.
 "We know a great deal more about transmission of influenza; we know a great deal about who is most likely to become gravely ill; we have drug treatment; we have a vaccine, even if imperfect," said Dr. Myron Cohen, director of the Institute for Global Health & Infectious Diseases at the University of North Carolina, in an email. "I think you can see big differences."
 The ways to prevent the spread of both the 2019 coronavirus and the flu are similar: wash your hands, avoid touching your face, disinfect your home and stay away from people who are sick.
 "While it may be true that ‘you're more likely to die of influenza right now,’ that is really the wrong way to look at the question," said Emily Bruce, a faculty scientist at the University of Vermont’s Division of Immunobiology, in an email. "It's more important to ask, ‘What will the situation look like three months from now if we do nothing?’"
 Part of the current public health response is trying to prevent COVID-19 from becoming an established, regularly occurring illness like the flu. 
 Our ruling
 Dr. Drew said "you’re more likely to die of influenza right now" than the 2019 coronavirus.
 The key phrase in this claim is "right now." It’s true that, as of March 10, the flu poses a more immediate threat to the American public than the 2019 coronavirus. That’s because it’s currently more widespread; the CDC estimated there were as many as 49 million flu illnesses from October to February, while there have been 647 coronavirus cases in the United States.
 But the mortality rate of the flu is lower than that of COVID-19 — the former is estimated to be as high as 0.1%, while the latter is around 3.4% so far. That means you’re more likely to die if you get the coronavirus than if you get the flu, even though you’re less likely to contract COVID-19.
 Dr. Drew’s claim is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
As schools across the country open for the uncertain, unprecedented school year to come, opinions are split on how to do so safely. 
 Some districts have opted for completely virtual learning. Others will try a mix of both online and in-person classes, or will send younger children to school while older kids stay home, or will phase students back to the classroom gradually. 
 Others still are calling for schools to reopen completely for those who feel well enough to teach and attend, and who aren’t especially vulnerable to COVID-19. 
 One such voice is U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wisconsin, who in an Aug. 13, 2020 radio interview with Milwaukee talk show host Steve Scaffidi on WTMJ-AM discussed why he believes students need to return to school in person this fall. 
 For younger people, Johnson asserted, "seasonal flu is actually, in many cases, a deadlier virus if they contract that." 
 Is Johnson correct that COVID-19 is less deadly for children than the flu? 
 Let’s dig in. 
 COVID was less harsh on kids than the flu, this year’s stats show
 To back up his claim, Johnson’s office sent statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on flu and COVID-19 deaths among Americans under age 18.
 During the 2018-19 flu season, the CDC reported approximately 480 flu deaths among children ages 0-17, about 30% of whom had a lab-confirmed case of influenza.
 Comparably, 90 American youth have died from coronavirus complications from the beginning of the pandemic through mid-August, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. 
 More than 46,000 children were hospitalized for flu in that 2018-19 period. The hospitalization rate among children 5 to 17 was 39.2 children per 100,000 children. For COVID-19, that hospitalization rate is 6 per 100,000 children ages 5 to 17, the CDC says.
 In a report detailing the differences between COVID-19 and the flu, the CDC states that "the risk of complications for healthy children is higher for flu compared to COVID-19."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 And data from Wisconsin echoes that sentiment. Since the pandemic began, no children have died from COVID-19 complications, according to state Department of Health Services death data, and 147 people ages 0-19 have been hospitalized. In contrast, three pediatric flu deaths occurred during this year’s flu season, DHS data show, and 605 kids ages 17 and under have been hospitalized. 
 What those statistics might not account for 
 The data show there have been fewer childhood deaths from COVID-19 so far this year than from the seasonal flu. 
 The hold-up, of course, lies in nuance, said Dr. Jon Temte, associate dean for public health and community engagement within UW-Madison’s School of Medicine and Public Health. 
 "U.S. schools have been out (and) mostly closed since March, thus extremely limiting cases of SARS-CoV-2 in children. Conversely, we rarely close schools for influenza, thus allowing an attack rate of 30-40% in school-aged children," Temte wrote in an Aug. 27, 2020 email to PolitiFact Wisconsin. 
 That is, the flu has been able to spread through children more commonly than COVID-19, creating more cases, more complications and more deaths. 
 Other experts agree. Dr. Chad Vercio, chair of pediatrics at Riverside University Health System in California, said children’s risk from the coronavirus depends on how widespread the virus is in any given area, and that "it is unknown" if COVID hospitalization rates would rise once schools reopen.
 And though the early data suggests that COVID-19 is not as bad for children as the flu, it’s just that: Early. 
 Dr. Vidya Mony, an infectious disease expert with Santa Clara Valley Medical Center in San Jose, Calif., said there isn’t enough data yet to say indisputably that COVID risks are lower for kids.
 Our ruling 
 Johnson claimed that in many cases, the seasonal flu was a deadlier virus for youth than COVID-19. 
 The numbers show that this year, that was the case. More children died from flu complications than from COVID-19, and were hospitalized at higher rates for the flu. 
 But experts caution that we don’t have enough data to paint the full picture so early in the game, and that schools shutting down in early spring may have driven down coronavirus case rates in children — meaning we can’t be sure exactly how the virus will move through young people when more of them are potentially getting exposed. 
 Our definition for Mostly True is "the statement is accurate but needs clarification or additional information." 
 That fits here.
Lt. Governor Dan Forest thinks he would be a better governor than Roy Cooper.
 But Cooper says Forest hasn’t put in the work needed to hold the office. The two went at it on Oct. 14 in North Carolina’s lone gubernatorial debate.
 "The Lieutenant Governor is on the state board of education where the state opening plans are discussed and voted on. And while I’m working with them and public health officials, he’s missed almost half of the board of education meetings during the pandemic," Cooper said.
 Forest responded by saying "I’ve been to almost every one of those meetings, especially every voting meeting. My staff sits in. My education experts and advisors sit in on all of those meetings, we don’t miss a beat on an education meeting. We never have. We’ve always been present at all of them."
 So what’s the truth here? 
 We’ll rate Cooper’s statement, since he’s the one bringing up the subject as an attack.
 He said Forest has missed almost half of North Carolina’s education board meetings during the pandemic.
 As it turns out, Cooper’s claim is almost spot-on.
 Attendance record
 The Board of Education has not uploaded its meeting minutes since March. So we listened to audio files uploaded to YouTube. Then we asked the North Carolina Department of Instruction for attendance records.
 Cooper declared a state of emergency because of the coronavirus on March 10, so we’re using that as the start date for the pandemic in North Carolina.
 There have been 28 meetings since then, according to Deanna Townsend-Smith, DPI’s director of board operations and policy. Most of them were over an hour long, meaning the board has spent well over 24 hours talking about education policy just in the last eight months.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forest has missed 13 of the 28 meetings, or 46%.
 Forest missed meetings on March 18 and 27. He attended five meetings in a row before missing seven out of 10 from the beginning of May to the end of July. He then missed four in a row between Sept. 3 and Oct. 7.
 In some cases, Forest arrived late to meetings but was still counted present. 
 "Present does not always mean attendance for the entire meeting, but present at some point and time," Townsend-Smith said.
 What Forest missed
 It’s unclear why Forest missed the meetings. Neither his office nor his campaign responded to questions from PolitiFact this week.
 Forest said during the debate that his experts and advisors "sit in on all" of the meetings.
 Staff members can’t vote. And Townsend-Smith told PolitiFact that board members "cannot have anyone attend the meeting on their behalf."
 Forest "may have had someone listening to the meeting on his behalf," she said, adding "however that is not something that is within my purview and you would need to verify that with the LG’s office."
 Forest has downplayed the threat of the coronavirus, saying the state should reopen schools without a mask mandate. DPI’s records show Forest missed votes that made changes to grading, testing and graduation requirements, set guidelines for remote learning, as well as another vote on grade point averages. 
 Our ruling
 Cooper said Forest has "missed almost half of the board of education meetings during the pandemic."
 We’re not here to say whether or not Forest should have attended the meetings. However, we can say whether Cooper’s stat is correct.
 The state Department of Instruction says Forest has missed 13 of 28 meetings since the pandemic started. That means he’s missed 46% of the meetings. 
 That’s close enough to "half" for us. We rate Cooper’s claim is True.
The U.S. still lags behind a number of other countries in the share of its population that’s been tested for COVID-19. But how do individual states within the U.S. compare with one another?
 That’s a subject Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot raised at a news conference while highlighting the need for increased testing capacity in Illinois to respond to the outbreak.
 "Illinois lags way behind all of our neighbors and certainly we’re in the bottom tier of states that are doing testing because of the availability," Lightfoot said on April 7. "It’s not for lack of desire, it’s for lack of the tests themselves, the reagents, some of the other materials that we need to be able to process the tests."
 Illinois, like many states, has struggled to expand testing due to the national shortage of tests and other supplies. And while the numbers are improving, Gov. J.B. Pritzker has said the state is still falling short of the goal he set for performing 10,000 tests per day. In an interview aired on April 14, the governor said the state is now conducting almost 8,000.
 But Illinois is not unique in the testing challenges it is facing, so we wondered whether the state was really as far behind as Lightfoot suggested.
 In response to our inquiry, a spokeswoman for the mayor’s office acknowledged testing figures have improved somewhat from several weeks ago, but provided a March 27 report from ABC 7 that found more than half of all states had done more testing than Illinois had after accounting for population size, including neighboring Wisconsin.
 Those results were based on data from March 26 — almost two weeks before the mayor made her comparison. Given how rapidly testing data are fluctuating, we decided to evaluate her claim based on more recent figures.
 To do that, we turned to data from the COVID Tracking Project, a source Lightfoot’s office pointed to in a later response.
 The project, which is managed and updated by volunteer journalists and scientists, gathers data from state health departments around the country and provides figures on the total number of tests conducted by both public and commercial labs.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Its database shows Lightfoot was partly right and partly wrong when she said Illinois was testing at a rate that put it behind all its neighbors as well as in the "bottom tier" nationwide.
 The day Lightfoot made her claim, Illinois ranked 28 out of all 50 states for testing on a per capita basis, figures from the project show. Its ranking has improved only slightly in the time since, with the state coming in 24th as of April 14. Its current tally of just over 110,600 total tests comes out to about 8,730 tests per million residents. New York, which tops the list, has run more than 25,650 tests per million.
 But Lightfoot’s Illinois comparison doesn’t hold when it comes to the states it borders. On the day she made her claim, Illinois came out slightly ahead of Wisconsin, Missouri, Kentucky, Indiana and Iowa. And in the days since, its lead has continued to grow.
 Given how frequently testing figures change — along with differences in the ways states report their data — that lead in the Midwest may not mean much. But it’s enough to show Lightfoot is incorrect in her assertion that Illinois is trailing the region.
 Our ruling
 Lightfoot said, "Illinois lags way behind all of our neighbors and certainly we’re in the bottom tier of states that are doing testing."
 At the time Lightfoot made her statement, Illinois did lag a majority of states nationally in terms of the share of its population that had been tested for COVID-19, according to data compiled by an independent reporting project.
 But the same dataset shows Illinois tested — and continues to test — more residents per capita than the states it borders.
 We rate Lightfoot’s claim Half True.
 
 HALF TRUE – The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context.
 Click here for more on the six PolitiFact ratings and how we select facts to check.
You may have noticed there are new settings on your phone for tracking COVID-19. What’s that all about?
 Not an unauthorized surveillance plot, as one popular social media rumor suggests.
 "Remember a few days ago when everyones phone was acting crazy?" reads a June 24 Facebook post, which is a screenshot of a comment on a live video. "Well they put a covid tracker on every phone. Go look its there on your phone right now."
 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) Similar claims have been shared widely by other Facebook and Instagram users, including a rapper with more than 420,000 followers.
 Having a health tracker installed on every Android and iOS device may sound invasive, so we wanted to investigate.
 
 (Screenshot from Facebook)
 We’re not sure what the Facebook post means when it says phones were "acting crazy," but Snopes reported that a network outage June 15 affected primarily T-Mobile customers.
 While there are settings on your iPhone for "COVID-19 Exposure Logging," you must opt in to the feature, which is aimed at helping contact tracers slow the spread of the coronavirus. Few states have said they will use the technology, which comes with a slew of privacy restrictions.
 How Apple and Google are helping contact tracers
 Apple and Google have created technology to help public health officials. But the subtext of the Facebook post — that the companies are tracking users without their knowledge — is inaccurate.
 In April, Apple and Google announced they were building a tracking system for iOS and Android mobile operating systems. The feature, samples of which were released in early May, uses Bluetooth Low Energy signals to automatically send users notifications when they have come in contact with someone who tested positive for COVID-19 and who has also enabled the technology. Apple rolled out the new settings with iOS 13.5 on May 20.
 
 The feature would work like this: 
 Say you’re diagnosed with COVID-19. You have a contact tracing app from your local public health department on your phone, so you report your diagnosis. Then, with your consent, the app uses your phone’s Bluetooth data to find other cellphone users you’ve been in contact with over the past 14 days (which is how long people could spread the virus without showing symptoms). Finally, if those people have consented to using the technology, the system notifies them that they were potentially exposed to the coronavirus.
 
 (Screenshot from Google)
 The tracking system is aimed at helping public health officials conduct contact tracing, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says is a key part of reopening the country.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact tracing tasks public health workers with learning as much as they can about who a patient has been in contact with so they can be notified about their potential exposure. One way to think about the process is a series of "disease investigations."
 "That’s like the nickname for them. It’s investigative work — you’ve got to learn everything about this person that you can, and you have to help them recall what they did over the last 14 days," Jerne Shapiro, a lecturer in the Department of Epidemiology at the University of Florida, previously told PolitiFact. "This is called ‘shoe-leather epidemiology.’"
 Some public health experts have extolled the potential of the Apple-Google partnership in helping epidemiologists quickly track down potential COVID-19 patients. The thinking is that, by limiting the amount of time someone is unknowingly spreading the coronavirus, the number of new cases would decrease.
 "Once we have the capability to test as many people as want to get tested, the capability of the human resource side — to put somebody in isolation who is positive, to find out who their contacts were and put them into quarantine — that is your strongest tool to prevent the spread of the disease," Shapiro said.
 Exposure system has privacy controls
 Some social media users and experts have raised concerns over how cellphone users’ data could potentially be misused by Apple, Google and public health authorities. But the contact tracing system has some built-in privacy settings that aim to safeguard users’ data.
 First, to participate in the tracking programs, users must install one of the authorized public health apps and then choose to turn on the COVID-19 exposure notifications (which they can turn off at any time). Second, location data is not stored in the system — just Bluetooth identifiers, which change frequently and do not give other users, Apple or Google the identities of their owners.
 Finally: "Only public health authorities will have access to this technology, and their apps must meet specific criteria around privacy, security and data control," according to an FAQ about the feature. Apple and Google have said they will shut down the feature once the pandemic ends.
 RELATED: Contact tracing: How it's used to fight COVID-19
 As of June 5, few states have said they will use the contact tracing system.
 9to5Mac, a website that writes about Apple products, polled all 50 state governors’ offices and health departments in late May to see if any were planning to use the technology. Only four — Alabama, North Dakota, South Carolina and Virginia — said they would. Seventeen states said they would not use the system, and the rest did not respond. 
 A poll from Business Insider had similar results. Many states told the publication that they intended to rely on human contact tracers. Other challenges facing Apple and Google’s technology: It’s hard to get people to download apps from public health officials, the federal government hasn’t endorsed the approach, and it’s unclear whether Bluetooth contact tracing systems have been effective in other countries, such as Norway.
 We reached out to Google for a comment, but we haven’t heard back.
 Our ruling
 A social media rumor claims that Google and Apple "put a covid tracker on every phone."
 The technology companies created a system that notifies cellphone users when they’ve been exposed to a COVID-19 patient who was enabled the same technology. The system aims to help public health officials slow the spread of the coronavirus by limiting the amount of time infected people who don’t show symptoms unknowingly spread the virus.
 But the subtext of the Facebook post — that the companies are using the system to track users without their knowledge — is inaccurate. iPhone and Android users must opt in to the feature, and personal information like location data will not be shared. Only a few states have said they will use the technology to support their contact tracing efforts.
 The Facebook post is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. We rate it Half True.
New York continues to be the epicenter of the novel coronavirus in the United States, with the lion's share of cases coming from, or around, New York City.
 The city’s residents have been warned to stay home for weeks, with Gov. Andrew Cuomo formally signing a state-wide "stay-at-home" order on March 20 that banned all non-essential businesses from conducting in-office work and stopped all "non-essential gatherings of individuals of any size for any reason."
 Yet a photo shared on Facebook April 2 showed an overcrowded NYC subway car along with a caption that seemed almost unbelievable during a time of extreme social distancing:
 "This is NYC#2 train this afternoon!!!! And their mayor and governor wants to blame trump!!!! Damn what a disgrace!!!! Spread this far and wide!!!!"
 The image was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 In this case, the post isn’t far off – the image is real and was taken just three days earlier, during rush hour on a Bronx-bound train on March 30.
 The photo was posted that evening on Twitter by user Hiam Abbas, who wrote: 
 "4:30 PM today, #2 BX bound train. Trains are infrequent. All cars were this crowded. Social distancing? Containment? Essential workers are at risk."
 4:30 PM today, #2 BX bound train. Trains are infrequent. All cars were this crowded. Social distancing? Containment? Essential workers are at risk. @NYCTSubway @WajahatAli @NYCMayor @NYGovCuomo @Gothamist @NY1 @nyc311 @nytimes @JumaaneWilliams @AOC @shaunking @NewYorker @ABC7NY https://t.co/IEx8B9KdyM pic.twitter.com/Wp7Kj5Ca8i
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 — Hiam Abbas (@showmetheequity) March 30, 2020 
 Abbas’ post includes another photo of an overcrowded train, this one heading into Manhattan during the morning commute.
 With ridership plummeting and fewer crew members working, New York’s Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced implementation of its "essential service plan," which aims to to help move healthcare workers, first responders and essential personnel while scaling back train and bus service overall; some lines are running on modified schedules and others aren’t running at all.
 But public transit is a commuting lifeline for many essential workers, and the reduction in service can make it difficult to maintain the social distancing that health officials recommend.
 The MTA responded to Abbas’ photo on Twitter, saying it would be "escalated to supervision for investigation."
 In an interview with the news channel New York 1 that same day, Mayor Bill de Blasio said fewer people are riding the subway, so this kind of problem isn’t typical. He said subway cars can get overcrowded sometimes due to a train breaking down or a service delay, but he also concluded that crowding on trains was "not acceptable."
 "I understand people are trying to get somewhere, but no one should be getting on a crowded train," de Blasio said. "Spread out throughout the train. Wait for the next train."
 According to a report by the New York Times, although overall subway ridership is down 87%, the steepest declines have occurred in richer neighborhoods. 
 Manhattan, which has a median income around $80,000, saw a 75% decrease in ridership, the Times reports, while the Bronx, where the median household income is about $38,000, saw only a 55% decrease. 
 The post is off on the date of the photo, but only by a few days; it was taken well into New York’s stay-at-home order. We rate it True.
Since the coronavirus outbreak, Washington officials have offered plans to help businesses and unemployed Americans.
 One of those plans included proposed changes to election laws, prompting pushback from some Republicans in North Carolina.
 David Lewis, a Republican member of the North Carolina House of Representatives, tweeted about a proposal that he says came from Democratic U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.
 "Pelosi tried to block voter ID/absentee ballot protections," Lewis tweeted in capital letters, accusing her of "playing games." In a second tweet, he added that Pelosi’s bill includes "a Voter ID ban and removal of absentee ballot protections."
 
 Voter ID and absentee ballot laws have been top-of-mind for North Carolina politicians since 2018.
 Through a referendum in 2018, North Carolina voters approved the idea of requiring a photo ID at the polls. But the law crafted by lawmakers is on hold because of a legal challenge.
 Absentee ballots, meanwhile, were at the heart of North Carolina’s voided 9th Congressional District race that year. The North Carolina elections board scrapped the contest results after witnesses testified to tampering with absentee ballots. (A special election was held in 2019, when Republican Dan Bishop beat Democrat Dan McCready.)
 So is Lewis right about the bill he cited? Would that bill "block voter ID" and "absentee ballot protections?"
 His tweet is vague and could give the impression that North Carolina’s photo ID law has been enacted, even though it’s on hold. But Lewis has a point that the bill he cited would weaken North Carolina’s existing absentee ballot laws.
 Lewis referenced a bill known as the "Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act." The bill that doesn’t list Pelosi as a sponsor. But she endorsed the bill and advocated for it when it was introduced on March 23. 
 Now let’s look at what the bill says.
 Absentee ballots
 North Carolina election laws require someone voting absentee-by-mail to mark their ballots in the presence of two witnesses, or just one person who's a Notary Public. 
 The U.S. House bill would prohibit states from requiring those signatures on absentee ballots. (You can see this proposal under the "Promoting ability of voters to vote by mail" section of the bill, which Lewis referenced in his tweet.)
 North Carolina allows "only the voter or the voter’s near relative" to return an absentee ballot to the local board of elections. "Near relative" is defined as a voter’s spouse, brother, sister, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, mother-in-law, father-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, stepparent, or stepchild.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The bill supported by Pelosi would allow "any person to return a voted and sealed absentee ballot" so long as that person doesn’t receive compensation "based on the number of ballots" they collect and return (page 830 of the bill). 
 The bill also says states "may not put any limit on how many voted and sealed absentee ballots any designated person can return." Collecting large quantities of ballots is sometimes referred to as "ballot harvesting" and is what happened in North Carolina’s tainted 2018 Congressional election.
 So Lewis is correct to say that Pelosi’s bill would eliminate some of North Carolina’s existing absentee ballot requirements.
 Voter ID
 This is where Lewis’s tweets need a lot more context. 
 Someone reading them might get the impression that the House bill blocks voter ID laws across the country, including in-person voter ID laws.
 Lewis said through a spokesman that he was only referring to voter ID as it relates to absentee ballots. But that’s not clear from his tweets. His second tweet -- that the bill includes "a Voter ID ban and removal of absentee ballot protections" -- suggests he could be talking about two separate issues.
 North Carolina’s photo law is on hold, as we already mentioned. And the bill doesn’t appear to nullify in-person voter ID laws.
 "I don’t see any restriction in this bill on any state identification law for voting in person," said Justin Levitt, a Loyola Law School professor, associate dean for research and operator of the "All about redistricting" website. He added that he hadn’t thoroughly read all 1,400 pages of the bill.
 As for absentee voting, the bill would make "no-excuse needed" absentee-by-mail available across the country. While some states require voters to have an excuse to qualify for absentee voting, North Carolina already allows voters to request an absentee ballot for any reason. (So that part of the bill wouldn’t change anything in NC.)
 The bill may, however, touch a part of North Carolina’s law that requires absentee voters to present ID. It says states "may not" require "any form of identification as a condition of obtaining the absentee ballot." (page 821 of the bill)
 North Carolina law requires people requesting an absentee ballot to provide their driver’s license number -- or the last four digits of their Social Security number. That requirement is unique to North Carolina and only a handful of other states, Levitt said.
 "In most states with an ID requirement for voting in-person and also no-excuse absentee ballots, the states undercut their own laws, which was one of the arguments advocates repeatedly made in support of the fact that the in-person ID laws were more security theater than security," Levitt said.
 That said, the bill wouldn’t leave states without a mode of verifying voters’ identities. It would require voters to sign their ballots. And would allow states to investigate the vote if the signature on the ballot didn’t match the signature on-file with the local elections office.
 "The signature verification, albeit imperfect, is a means of establishing identity, and more rigorously enforced in the election context than the system we use daily for commercial transactions," Levitt said.
 Our ruling
 Lewis tweeted that "Pelosi tried to block voter ID/absentee ballot protections." 
 The tweet is vague and could give the false impression that the bill supported by Pelosi and House Democrats nullifies an existing in-person voter ID law. That’s not the case.
 However, Lewis is correct that the bill would strip away some of North Carolina’s existing absentee ballot laws. We rate this claim Half True.
In just over 24 hours, some 12,000 people shared a post from the Kenosha County Democratic party slamming the coronavirus vote by Wisconsin’s Republican congressional delegation.
 The emergency measure — which includes free testing for COVID-19, paid emergency leave and other emergency appropriations — easily passed both houses of Congress and was signed into law by President Donald Trump on March 18, 2020.
 But it passed without much help from Wisconsin.
 The Kenosha Democrats seized on that fact in a March 19, 2020, Facebook post. The post explained the bill, commented on gerrymandering and noted the GOP no votes from purple Wisconsin went beyond the breakdown from even the deepest red of the red states. 
 It was accompanied by a graphic with pictures of U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and U.S. Reps. Mike Gallagher, Glenn Grothman, Jim Sensenbrenner and Bryan Steil that said this: "WI is the ONLY state where all Republicans voted against protecting its citizens."
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Let’s check it out.
 
 The votes
 The bill passed 363-40 in the U.S. House and 90-8 in the U.S. Senate. 
 Indeed, all five Republicans in the Wisconsin delegation cast a no vote, according to roll calls published by ProPublica. All four state Democrats voted for the bill.
 And, yes, that clean sweep of Republican votes was unique around the country.
 In Oklahoma both Republican senators voted against the bill, but two of three Republican representatives supported it. Iowa’s lone Republican representative voted no, but both Republican senators there supported the bill.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The summary
 That leaves us to look at the characterization that Wisconsin Republicans "voted against protecting (the state’s) citizens"?
 Like anything in politics, it’s more complicated than that. In various statements issued after the votes, the state’s Republican lawmakers didn’t object to the concept of providing help amid the pandemic, but they took issue with numerous specifics in the bill and how the process was handled.
 Sensenbrenner objected to spending money on a bill that he said stretched 100 pages and was presented with less than 30 minutes to review.
 "We do not know the full cost of this legislation," he said in a statement. "I am not a fan of passing bills to find out what is in them."
 Steil told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel he voted against the bill because it "places a heavy government mandate on Wisconsin small businesses that are already suffering negative consequences from coronavirus."
 Gallagher echoed those comments in a statement, saying he feared the bill would hurt small businesses.
 "This bill, while well-intentioned, contains a number of unclear provisions that could force small businesses in Northeast Wisconsin to lay off workers or cause them to close their doors altogether," Gallagher said. "Let me be clear: H.R. 6201 contained a number of good provisions like free testing that we’ve already successfully fought for. But I have serious questions as to whether the best way to support those needing paid and sick leave is through tax credits to small businesses instead of direct payments to those affected."
 Lori Hawkins, chair of the Kenosha County Democratic Party, defended the description in the Facebook post. She said the bill guided both testing and treatment to help control the spread of the disease.
 "A 'no' vote by our elected officials was a vote against protecting their constituents from this highly contagious disease which has already been deadly to residents in Wisconsin," she said in an email.
 Our ruling
 A viral Facebook post said Wisconsin "is the only state where all Republicans voted against protecting its citizens."
 It is indeed the only state where all Republicans opposed the bill, which has now become law.
 But it’s a bit of an exaggeration to summarize their decisions as a vote "against protecting (Wisconsin) citizens." And of course this is expected to be just the first of many bills addressing the coronavirus fallout. 
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
The pressure is building for Congress to pass a fourth coronavirus relief bill, beyond the roughly $2.2 trillion already approved to keep people and businesses viable during an unprecedented viral attack. And Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) is making his case for what a supplemental rescue package should include ― guaranteed universal sick leave for all workers. 
 "It has been estimated that only 12% of workers in businesses that are likely to stay open during this crisis are receiving paid sick leave benefits as a result of the second coronavirus relief package," Sanders argued in an op-ed published April 8 in The Guardian, just hours before he suspended his presidential campaign. 
 Paid sick leave emerged as a sticky issue on Capitol Hill as lawmakers worked to develop a federal relief package. The Families First Coronavirus Emergency Response Act, which President Donald Trump signed into law on March 18, included a guarantee of paid sick leave for some workers, which supporters say is crucial to make sure those who contract the virus are, in fact, able to stay home.
 The law requires companies that employ fewer than 500 people to provide two weeks of emergency sick leave if an employee develops COVID-19 symptoms, is isolating per the advice of a medical professional or is caring for a family member with a potential case of COVID-19. These employers also must provide paid family leave for people who may need to care for children during coronavirus school closures.
 But the law exempts bigger companies, a category that includes often-"essential" retailers like Amazon, Walmart, Target and supermarket chains. That concession was made to satisfy the White House and congressional Republicans, many of whom have argued that most big companies already offer sick leave packages, and a federal requirement would create unnecessary red tape.
 Sanders’ argument is that their employees are still vulnerable. Many of the firms exempted by the law remain open during the crisis. Employees who may become ill will not be protected by the federal guarantee of sick leave. Sanders argues that many will fall through the cracks because, while their employers can choose to provide paid time off, those benefits would not fall under the federal directive and could prove less generous than what smaller firms, which must comply with the law, will provide.
 We contacted Sanders’ congressional office for more information but never heard back. Our research suggests that he has the big picture right, though the precise calculations are tricky.
 The 12%
 Nuances in the law make it difficult to quantify the number of people who would benefit from the relief package’s paid sick leave requirement.
 Sanders’ figure appears to come from an analysis conducted by The Washington Post, which suggests that "only 12 percent of workers in businesses that are likely to stay open will be affected."
 The analysis used Philadelphia’s shelter-in-place order to determine which private-sector businesses would likely stay open because it offered a clear and publicly available list of workplaces excluded from the order. Other experts validated this approach, noting that this list was a good proxy — though not a perfect one — for locations across the country.
 Then, the Post used data from the Census Bureau’s Statistics of U.S. Businesses (the most recent figures come from 2017) to determine how often those excluded businesses ― such as grocery stores, pharmacies, big-box stores, hardware stores, banks and dry cleaners — employed enough people to qualify for an exemption from the paid sick leave mandate. It arrived at the rate of 12%.
 So, first and foremost: Sanders is correct that someone had estimated this percentage.
 But there’s more to consider.
 The law and its exceptions
 Because of the law’s exemptions for large companies, many of the workers Americans are counting on now may not have protection.
 "The workers who are on the front lines, on the grocery chains, pharmacies and warehouses, aren’t covered," said Vicki Shabo, a senior fellow for paid leave policy and strategy at New America, a centrist think tank. "The businesses that continue to operate are very likely to be those that are bigger, that have the cash flows to keep their sales going and that provide essential services."
 Per the Post’s analysis, those large companies employ about 7.4 million people who would likely be deemed essential workers.
 The law provides other exemptions, too.
 In interpreting the law, the Labor Department has issued regulations saying that a company with fewer than 50 employees can exempt itself from the paid family leave element of the mandate if it burdens business operations.
 But the new law still requires those small businesses to provide paid medical leave to their employees, a total workforce of about 2.2 million ― a factor, some policy researchers pointed out, the Post did not include in its analysis.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 If you redo the math counting those workers, the measure’s sick leave promise holds up a bit better — encompassing about a third of all essential workers.
 But there’s another catch.
 The law also does not guarantee paid sick leave to health care providers and emergency responders ― another category of workers typically deemed essential during a pandemic. The Labor Department defines these categories broadly. For instance, health care providers include "workers who are needed to keep hospitals and similar health care facilities well supplied and operational," not only clinicians.
 Back-of-the-envelope math suggests that by factoring these various exemptions into the number of likely essential employees guaranteed paid sick leave under the relief package — dividing the number of essential workers who qualify for guaranteed leave by the full count of essential workers — the true percentage of people covered hovers closer to the teens.
 Bottom line: "We need people to understand just how broad the exemptions ended up being," said Kathleen Romig, a senior analyst at the left-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
 The bigger picture
 The numerous carve-outs in the federal mandate — and the benefits it requires from eligible companies ― together illuminate a larger point. Historically, American sick leave policies haven’t been uniform across industries or organizations. The new law does build on policies some businesses already had in place, Shabo said.
 For instance, private-sector workers who had sick leave, on average, received seven paid days a year guaranteed. The law bumps that up to 10 days (so, two workweeks for most people) and allows those days to be used to care for someone else. That’s a big change.
 Even so, the majority of front-line workers are not covered by the federal promise of paid leave if they fall ill during the pandemic. Many get some kind of paid sick leave. Dillon Clair, a public policy associate at the ERISA Industry Committee — which represents large employers ― said, typically the companies his organization represents offer at least 40 hours of paid sick leave, and that medical leave is accompanied by other benefits (like vacation time) that employees can use if they fall ill after exhausting their sick leave.
 Meanwhile, companies like Walmart and McDonald’s have rolled out emergency coronavirus programs, offering two weeks of paid time off for people the company deems sufficiently at risk. But the issue of who is deemed at risk gets dicey.
 Other employers, like Burger King, Dunkin’ and Marriott International, have not instituted any emergency coronavirus policies for their workers, according to New America.
 And the lack of standardization means that many of the voluntary leave policies have substantial holes, Shabo said.
 For instance, McDonald’s and Walmart both require employees to get an official quarantine recommendation or a confirmed medical diagnosis of COVID-19 to access the sick leave benefit. Those operational barriers mean people who have developed the virus are less likely to stay home — especially because coronavirus tests are sometimes difficult to come by.
 That influences both individual and public health.
 "They’re more likely to get sick than someone like me, who is self-isolating and working from home. They are literally putting themselves at risk every time they go to work," Romig said.
 Without a guarantee of paid leave, she added, individual workers may have to choose between taking a day off to recover from illness and earning money for groceries. And there are the public implications, too.
 "We really don’t want people who have contracted this virus to be in public. We don’t want them at the grocery store where everyone has to go to get food," she said. "We want them out of circulation. We want them to have the income they need to sustain that."
 Our ruling
 In his op-ed, Sanders argued that "it has been estimated that only 12% of workers in businesses that are likely to stay open during this crisis are receiving paid sick leave benefits as a result of the second coronavirus relief package."
 This is true. There are different takes on the math, but when you factor in the impact of the law’s exemptions to this requirement, it still appears that the number of essential workers guaranteed paid sick leave because of this law is in the range of 12% to the low teens.
 More important, Sanders is correct about the big picture: Congress’ paid sick leave guarantee exempts the vast majority of front-line workers during the pandemic, which could make containing the virus harder.
 Sanders’ claim could use some more context, but it is generally a fair assessment. We rate it Mostly True.
The coronavirus pandemic isn’t yet approaching its end, but Democrats are expressing widespread relief that the Biden administration — and not the Trump administration — will be tackling the virus from here on out.
 One post that attracted some 28,000 reactions reflected this sentiment.
 Over a picture of a smiling Biden flashing the thumbs-up sign, the Feb. 19 post said, "Boom! COVID-19 infections down 61% from Trump’s last day. COVID-19 vaccinations up 85% from Trump’s last day. Competence matters!!!"
 
 
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Here is a chart showing the seven-day rolling average for new coronavirus cases between Jan. 1 and Feb. 21. The first 20 days of that period were under President Donald Trump and are shown in red, while the rest were under Biden and are shown in blue.
 
 
 Cases fell by 65%, which is close to the 61% cited in the post.
 However, it’s worth noting that the number of cases started falling about 10 days before Biden took office, and that decline did not appreciably accelerate after he took office.
 As for vaccinations, they also increased steadily on Biden’s watch, but not at a significantly faster rate than they did in Trump’s final days.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The number of vaccinations on Feb. 19 was 88% higher than the number on Jan. 20, which is close to the 85% cited in the post. (The data show a decline in recent days that is due to a combination of slow reporting of data and delays caused by the winter storm that affected a broad cross-section of the country.)
 In contrast to Trump, who was criticized for a lack of focus on the pandemic and for a reluctance to stand firmly behind policies urged by public health experts such as wearing masks, Biden made fighting the pandemic a cornerstone of his presidential campaign and promised a more science-based approach and a stronger federal hand in the vaccine rollout.
 Still, experts cautioned against assuming that Biden deserves full credit for these statistical gains.
 "I do not think it’s fair to say that Biden singlehandedly slashed coronavirus infections or caused vaccination to skyrocket, but he certainly didn’t seem to hurt the effort," said Brooke Nichols, an infectious disease mathematical modeler at the Boston University School of Public Health. 
 It’s also too early to say that Biden’s initiatives are having an on-the-ground impact that can be easily identified in the data, said Natalie Dean, a University of Florida biostatistician.
 "Although there have been some strong new initiatives put into place at the start of his term, these will take time to have an impact, particularly those related to vaccine rollout, such as ramping up manufacturing," Dean said. "Operation Warp Speed deserves a lot of credit for the availability of safe and efficacious vaccines, and this initiative was started under Trump."
 John Sellers, the executive director and co-founder of the Other98, told PolitiFact that the group agrees that "there are many factors playing a role on the trajectory of COVID vaccinations and infections." He added that the post does not explicitly state "that all these changes are due Biden."
 Our ruling
 A viral image that features Biden giving a thumbs up says "COVID-19 infections down 61% from Trump’s last day. COVID-19 vaccinations up 85% from Trump’s last day. Competence Matters."
 These specific figures are basically accurate, and both the number of new infections and the pace of vaccinations have shown steady improvement during Biden’s tenure. However, it’s important to note that the decline in cases began more than a week before Biden took office, and the pace of new cases and vaccinations did not change direction dramatically once Biden took office.
 The statement is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate the statement Mostly True.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo, trying to calm fears amid the spread of the novel coronavirus, told reporters there are no plans to issue quarantine measures for entire cities. And if mayors are talking about that, they can’t do it without state approval, he said. 
 "Mitigation is continuing and is ramping up," Cuomo said on Tuesday. "There are many rumors out there - part of the fear, the anxiety. People spread rumors. Well, maybe you're going to quarantine New York City. We hear New York City is going to quarantine itself. That is not true. That cannot happen. It cannot happen legally. No city in the state can quarantine itself without state approval, and I have no interest whatsoever and no plan whatsoever to quarantine any city."
 Later that day, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said city residents should prepare for a shelter-in-place order, though he said the decision needs to be "made together with the state." 
 De Blasio said that quarantine and shelter-in-place represent different approaches. "Shelter in place, to me, is a kind of way of life, if you will, and a more total strategy and quarantine suggests when you're dealing with a very specific, narrow area and who goes in and who goes out of that area," he said. 
 In an interview on Wednesday with The Daily podcast, Cuomo said whatever it’s called, quarantine or shelter in place, he’s not interested. 
 "That is not going to happen, shelter in place, for New York City," Cuomo said. "For any city or county to take an emergency action, the state has to approve it. And I wouldn't approve shelter in place. That scares people, right? Quarantine in place - you can't leave your home. The fear, the panic is a bigger problem than the virus."
 We wondered if a city or a county could unilaterally order its residents into isolation, whether by ordering a quarantine or shelter-in-place, or if Cuomo is right in his claim that only the state can do that.
 We spoke with Thomas Merrill, who retired in January as general counsel for the state Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. 
 "It’s a complicated answer," Merrill said. "Local governments have the authority under state law to enact curfews and take other emergency actions. But state law also gives the governor emergency powers, including the right to suspend any law or local order he feels impends a response. So ultimately the state likely has the final say," he said. 
 "The practical answer is they have to be working together," Merrill said of local governments and the state. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 He directed us to state Executive Law Section 24, which says that the New York State Legislature can override a local action, and Executive Law Section 29-A, which gives the governor power to override local laws or orders in a state emergency. In addition, Cuomo issued an executive order on March 7, requiring that local actions be approved. 
 Merrill was the top lawyer for the state Department of Health during the H1N1 pandemic, Ebola outbreak, and a recent measles outbreak. He said that during a quarantine, specific people are told that they are confined at home. In some cases, during an Ebola outbreak, police officers stood at patients’ doors to ensure they did not leave, he said. But with Covid-19, the novel coronavirus, the pandemic is past the phase when quarantines of specific patients would be effective in slowing the spread of the virus, he said. 
 Whether the directive is to "shelter in place," which is common during an active shooter situation, or "quarantine," the goal is that people socially distance themselves as much as possible, Merrill said. 
 Other experts we spoke with said the state has broad powers. 
 Generally, matters of public health are allocated to the state level, not the local level, said James A. Gardner, SUNY distinguished professor at the University at Buffalo. "Generally, the state is in a better position than a locality to make defensible decisions that restrict public travel on health grounds," he said. 
 We reached out to Cuomo and de Blasio’s press offices but did not hear back. 
 However, de Blasio said in an interview on Wednesday morning with TODAY on NBC that any shelter in place order would need to be done in cooperation with the state. 
 "It’s only a decision we would make with the state of New York, of course," de Blasio said. 
 Our ruling 
 Cuomo said that cities do not have the power to order quarantines without state approval. 
 Based on the powers of the state to override local orders contained in state Executive Law and in Cuomo’s recent executive order, we rate his claim True.
Gov. Greg Abbott followed 18 other Republican governors on Monday by rejecting federal pandemic unemployment benefits. 
 In a press release, a tweet and an appearance on Fox News, Abbott justified the decision by citing two figures that he argued illustrate the state’s post-pandemic economic recovery. First, there are more job vacancies than people receiving unemployment benefits; and second, the number of job openings in the state today is significantly higher than pre-pandemic levels. 
 "I had the Texas Workforce Commission dig into the numbers and provide me with the numbers, and here they are," Abbott told Fox News host Bill Hemmer on Tuesday. "We now have more job openings than we do people who are on unemployment. We have 60% more job openings today than we did the month before the pandemic hit the state of Texas." 
 Abbott’s decision, which goes into effect June 26, will cut $300 weekly payments to unemployed Texans by ending the state’s participation in the Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation program. Abbott also ended the state’s participation in the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, which provided self-employed people with aid throughout the pandemic. 
 As of March, the unemployment rate in Texas stood at 6.9%, or nearly 970,000 people, which is down from the pandemic high of 13% in April 2020, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Texas Workforce Commission reports that 1,029,890 million Texans are currently receiving unemployment payments; about 31% of them are receiving aid as self-employed workers. 
 The state’s withdrawal from the federal benefits programs comes at the urging of business leaders, who said that 60% of Texas businesses were hiring for at least one position and blamed their hiring struggles on the $300 weekly aid payments. But are there more job vacancies in the state than unemployed people, as Abbott claims? And how does the number of job openings today compare to pre-pandemic levels? 
 Job vacancies 
 The Texas Workforce Commission, which provided Abbott with a job vacancy estimate at his request, explained how they determined this figure. 
 According to a spokesperson, the state workforce agency found that a combined 850,000 jobs had been posted to the agency’s two state-run job boards — WorkinTexas.com and MyTXCareer.com. Then, using third-party software, the agency combined this total with the number of Texas job listings posted to private job boards like Indeed and Monster.com. 
 "The exact point of the software is to determine the number of jobs without double counting, since most jobs are posted on multiple sites," said Workforce Commission spokesperson James Bernsen. 
 According to this methodology, there were about 1,022,000 job postings in Texas as of May 11, which is slightly less than the total number of people currently receiving unemployment benefits. 
 But the job vacancy total comes with one caveat, Bernsen said. Because a single job posting may have more than one job vacancy associated with it, the total number may be "a bit deceptive," he said. However, the agency didn’t provide an estimate for how this caveat may affect the 1,022,000 total. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turning to Abbott’s second claim — that the state has 60% more job openings today than in February 2020 — we look again at data from the Texas Workforce Commission. 
 Using the same methodology that determined the present number of job openings, the Texas Workforce Commission found that about 645,000 jobs were available across the state’s job boards and private job boards in February 2020. That’s a 58.4% increase between the February 2020 number and the 1,022,000 job vacancies recorded on May 11. 
 
 
 The numbers don’t satisfy critics 
 Critics argue that low wages are to blame for employers' hiring difficulties rather than the $300 weekly unemployment payments. 
 Rick Levy, president of the Texas AFL-CIO, a pro-labor group, has called Abbott’s analysis too simplistic, and says that these computer-generated statistics ignore barriers to employment people continue to face. 
 "A bunch of business people said they wanted this to happen, and that’s why this is happening," Levy said. "And now [the governor’s office is] going back and backfilling their reason with this computerized approach." 
 Abbott said on Fox News that he directed the Workforce Commission to "dig into the numbers and provide me with" job market data.
 We asked for a copy of this correspondence from the governor’s office but have not received a response. We also asked the Workforce Commission for a copy of the correspondence. An agency official instructed us to file a request under the Texas Public Information Act. That request has not yet been fulfilled. 
 "Labor is a commodity, and if there is a shortage of labor, just like when there is a shortage of anything else, then you raise the price on that commodity," Levy said. "There is a shortage because people are unwilling to do it and wages today are historically low. The profits in this economy have been sucked up by the top 1%."
 Our ruling 
 Abbott said that there are now more job openings in the state than the number of people receiving unemployment benefits, and that the number of job openings today is 60% higher than the number recorded in the month before the pandemic. 
 Based on Texas Workforce Commission methodology, there are 1,022,000 job postings on state-run and privately run job boards, some of which represent more than one job. That should total slightly more than the 1,029,890 Texans on unemployment as of the most recent data.
 Furthermore, that 1,022,000 number is indeed about 60% higher than the 645,000 job openings the Texas Workforce Commission counted in February 2020. 
 We rate this claim True.
Americans who have turned to ivermectin to treat COVID-19 have drawn both ridicule and support. 
 One recent social media post, seemingly in the latter camp, argues that the drug "has been FDA approved for human use since 1996." 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 It is true that ivermectin was approved by the Food and Drug Administration that year — but not to treat the coronavirus. The drug was approved for strongyloidiasis, a disease caused by a roundworm, and onchocerciasis, or river blindness, which is caused by a parasitic worm. 
 The drug was approved for humans under the brand name Stromectol, National Geographic reported, and since then it’s been recognized as a safe treatment for several tropical diseases caused by parasites. In 2015, two scientists even won a Nobel Prize for their discovery of ivermectin and its use to treat diseases caused by parasites.
 But unlike, say, river blindness, COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus, not by parasites. And as PolitiFact recently reported in a story exploring ivermectin, there’s no conclusive evidence that ivermectin is effective against COVID-19. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indeed, it carries physical risks, and the FDA warns against using it, saying that while "ivermectin tablets are approved at very specific doses to treat some parasitic worms, and there are topical (on the skin) formulations for head lice and skin conditions like rosacea … the FDA has received multiple reports of patients who have required medical attention, including hospitalization, after self-medicating with ivermectin intended for livestock." 
 The science on whether ivermectin intended for humans could help treat COVID-19 is limited and mixed. Some studies, many with small sample sizes, have suggested it can, and others have shown no significant impact. 
 The World Health Organization advises against using ivermectin with COVID-19 patients "except in the context of a clinical trial" because there’s "very low-certainty evidence" that the drug works. Such clinical trials are ongoing. 
 So while ivermectin has been approved by the FDA for human use since 1996, the FDA has not authorized or approved ivermectin to prevent or treat COVID-19. 
 And, the ivermectin products intended for animals are different from the products approved for humans. "Use of animal ivermectin for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19 in humans is dangerous," the FDA says. 
 The statement in the Facebook post is accurate but needs additional clarification. We rate it Mostly True.
In a viral video clip, a suburban Atlanta mother who implored her local school board to stop mandating masks for children claimed that kids ages 5 to 9 "are not affected by" the coronavirus.
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Children have been less likely than adults to contract COVID-19, and it’s rare for them to become seriously ill with the virus — but to say they are not affected goes too far.
 More than 3.6 million children in the United States have tested positive, and at least 297 have died, according to the latest report from American Academy of Pediatrics and the Children’s Hospital Association. One reason schools require masks is to try to prevent kids from giving the virus to other people, which can happen even if kids become infected but don’t show symptoms.
 Moreover, because adults are being immunized and new variants of the virus are more likely to infect children, "children are rapidly becoming the major reservoir of COVID in the United States," said Dr. Mark Schleiss, professor of pediatrics at the University of Minnesota Medical School. 
 Clip shows woman addressing school board
 The two-minute video clip was widely shared by Facebook users, including conservative commentator and Fox Nation host Tomi Lahren, who has 4.8 million Facebook followers. She wrote: "This badass stuck her neck out and said what so many are thinking but are afraid to say! You go girl!!! BURN THE MASKS!"
 The clip shows Courtney Taylor on April 15 speaking to the Board of Education in Gwinnett County, outside of Atlanta.
 "Every month I come here and I hear the same thing: social-emotional health. If you truly mean that, you would end the mask requirement tonight. Tonight," said Taylor, who identified herself as the mother of a 6-year-old student. "This is not March 2020 anymore. We have three vaccines. Every adult in the state of Georgia that wants that vaccine is eligible to get it right now and everyone one of us knows that young children are not affected by this virus. They’re not. …
 "We chose you to make decisions that would be in our children’s best interest, and forcing 5-, 6-, 7-, 8- and 9-year-old little children to cover their noses and their mouths, where they breathe, for seven hours a day every day for the last nine months for a virus that you know doesn’t affect them — that is not in their best interest. And this has to stop." 
 The district requires masks for students, staff and visitors. Students can remove masks during meals; they can also remove them outside when "social distancing can be achieved."
 "Masks/cloth face coverings are meant to protect other people in case the wearer is unknowingly infected but does not have symptoms yet," the district says.
 COVID-19 among children
 Fewer than 10% of COVID-19 cases in the United States have been among children and adolescents age 5 to 17, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 In Kansas, one of the few states that provides data by age groups for children, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics, 4% of the COVID-19 cases — 12,325 — occurred among children 9 and under. 
 "At this time, it still appears that severe illness due to COVID-19 is rare among children. However, there is an urgent need to collect more data on longer-term impacts of the pandemic on children, including ways the virus may harm the long-term physical health of infected children, as well as its emotional and mental health effects," the report said.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most children who become infected have mild symptoms or no symptoms at all, but some can get severely ill, according to the CDC and other researchers. And while COVID-19 presents less risk to children and teens generally — and children under 10 appear less likely than adolescents to become infected — children can get sick and can spread the virus, even without symptoms, according to the CDC.
 The CDC is also investigating "a rare but serious medical condition" associated with COVID-19 in children called Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome, a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs. in Children. "We do not yet know what causes MIS-C and who is at increased risk for developing it," the CDC says.
 Why children react differently to the coronavirus isn’t yet clear, according to the Mayo Clinic.
 COVID-19 and schools
 Evidence indicates that "in-person learning in schools has not been associated with substantial" transmission of COVID-19 in the community, and that staff-to-staff transmission is more common than transmission from students to staff, staff to student, or student to student, according to the CDC.
 The CDC says multiple studies have shown that transmission within school settings is typically lower than, or at least similar to, levels of community transmission — "when prevention strategies are in place in schools."
 As we’ve reported, masks are most effective as "source control," which means preventing infected people from spreading the virus to other people. 
 Respiratory droplets carrying the virus are expelled into the air when infected people cough, talk, sneeze or breathe. These droplets quickly evaporate and shrink to become tiny airborne particles. 
 But if an infected person is wearing a mask, it will catch and contain the larger droplets in the humid space between the person’s mouth and the mask. In this environment, droplets take nearly a hundred times as long to transform into airborne particles. So, masks reduce the spread of infectious particles.
 This makes a meaningful difference when everyone is wearing masks. If you’re the only one wearing a mask in a public location, it won’t necessarily protect you from being infected. But if everybody is wearing a mask, your odds of infection will go down by quite a bit. 
 Public health experts have based their guidance on a variety of scientific studies: systematic reviews, ecological studies and laboratory studies. 
 Our ruling
 A woman in a video clip widely shared on Facebook stated that children ages 5 to 9 "are not affected by" the coronavirus.
 Most children who get COVID-19 have mild or no symptoms; severe illness is rare.
 But more than 3.6 million children have tested positive and at least 297 have died. And children can spread the virus to others, even if they don’t have symptoms, which is a key reason for mask requirements in schools.
 We rate the statement Half True.
 
 
 Join PolitiFact LIVE on May 10-13 for a festival of fact-checking with Dr. Anthony Fauci. Register today >>
There’s no question the COVID-19 pandemic is one of the deadliest events modern Americans have ever grappled with.
 But how its death toll compares with other tragedies and natural disasters is being misconstrued in a social media post that purports to list and rank the "deadliest days in American history." 
 The graphic shows that four of the eight deadliest days since the country’s founding took place between Dec. 2 and Dec. 7, 2020. The image places daily COVID-19 deaths from those days alongside death tolls from the Galveston Hurricane, the battle of Antietam, Pearl Harbor and the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
 This post, which was forwarded to us by a reader, was also flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Most of the figures cited are accurate and the general thrust of the claim is valid: The pandemic has produced staggeringly high daily death counts that reached 3,411 on Dec. 9 — a high that came after the image was created. Families have relayed haunting stories of heartbreak as their loved ones have died in isolation without the comfort of family members close by. 
 However, the post contains some problems: It does not take into account daily deaths not linked to a specific cause, and it omits some historical events that resulted in greater numbers of fatalities.
 Image doesn’t actually show "deadliest days"
 Although the image purports to be a list of the "deadliest days in American history," it only lists fatalities related to specific mass-fatality events. It leaves out the number of deaths from all causes. 
 For example, the list cites Dec. 4, 2020, as having a death toll of 2,861. 
 It’s true that 2,861 people were reported on that day to have died of COVID-19, according to the CDC’s Data Tracker. This number doesn’t include any of the people who died from causes besides COVID-19, such as murder, heart attacks or cancer. 
 In 2017, an average of 7,708 deaths occurred each day, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
 Other historical events omitted from the chart
 The list doesn’t provide an accurate list of the top eight deadliest days in American history. 
 Perhaps the most notable omission from the list is also the most directly analogous to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 1918 flu pandemic savaged the United States between Sept. 1 and Dec. 31, 1918, killing an estimated 381,019 people in those four months alone. That’s an average of around 3,123 people per day. 
 Other notable mass fatality events left out of the chart include:
 
 
 The Battle of Gettysburg, where an estimated 10,000 soldiers were either mortally wounded or killed over three days of fighting. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The San Francisco earthquake of 1906, which killed 3,400 people according to an official fatality count conducted by archivist Gladys Hansen. 
 
 
 The San Ciriaco hurricane, which killed 3,369 people in Puerto Rico on Aug. 8, 1899. 
 
 
 The Lake Okeechobee hurricane, which killed an estimated 2,500-3,000 people on Sept. 16, 1928. 
 
 
 And while the chart seems to focus on events that have claimed lives on U.S. soil, it does not explicitly say that. The D-Day invasion during World War II claimed the lives of 2,501 Americans, according to the National D-Day Memorial Foundation.
 Liz Skilton, an associate professor of history at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, who specializes in natural disasters, disapproved of the way the image compared different types of disastrous events by placing them side by side.
 "Different types of disasters rarely ever can be compared directly as there are different sets of hazards and reactions to these hazards that influence the outcome of events," she said. "This is not to say disasters cannot be compared at all, it just means that making direct comparisons between them in an oversimplified way is damaging to our understanding of their impact and could even harm our ability to react to these incidents appropriately."
 The chart gets some things right
 All that said, the numbers that the chart does rely on are generally accurate. 
 The Battle of Antietam resulted in about 3,600 deaths, and the attack on Pearl Harbor resulted in about 2,400 deaths according to the National Park Service. 
 The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 killed an estimated 8,000 to 12,000 people, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
 The 9/11 attacks killed an estimated 3,000 people according to the 9/11 Commission Report.
 The COVID-19 deaths in the chart are taken directly from the CDC’s Data Tracker. 
 Our ruling
 A viral image claims that the COVID-19 pandemic has caused 4 of the 8 "deadliest days in American history."
 The image omits some historical events and only lists fatalities linked to specific causes. 
 However, the broad claim of the image is accurate: the COVID-19 pandemic has seen daily death totals that have surpassed those of events memorialized as national tragedies, including Pearl Harbor and 9/11. 
 We rate this image Half True. ​
President Joe Biden exaggerated when he spoke about the effectiveness of the COVID-19 vaccine during a CNN town hall. "You're not going to get COVID if you have these vaccinations," Biden said.
 It is rare for people who are fully vaccinated to contract COVID-19, but it does happen. 
 News reports the week of the town hall show that a White House official and a staff member for House Speaker Nancy Pelosi both tested positive for COVID-19, although both were fully vaccinated, as did a handful of Texas Democrats who recently traveled to Washington, D.C. to prevent passage of Texas Republicans’ election bill.
 
 
 A White House spokesperson pointed to other comments Biden made during the July 21 town hall that less sweepingly characterized vaccinations as protecting people from serious illness or death.
 "This is a simple, basic proposition: If you’re vaccinated, you’re not going to be hospitalized, you’re not going to be in an ICU unit, and you’re not going to die," Biden said. 
 That, too, is a slight exaggeration, although hospitalizations and deaths among vaccinated people are extremely rare. 
 Biden was more accurate when he said vaccinated people who catch COVID-19 are "not likely to get sick. You’re probably going to be symptomless. You’re not going to be in a position where your life is in danger."
 Post-vaccination COVID-19 cases occur, but they are rare
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that COVID-19 vaccines are effective. But no vaccines are 100% effective at preventing illness. "There will be a small percentage of fully vaccinated people who still get sick, are hospitalized, or die from COVID-19," the CDC said.
 Millions of people across the country have been vaccinated. As of July 12, more than 159 million people had been fully vaccinated, according to the CDC. With 48 states and territories reporting, there were 5,492 confirmed breakthrough cases of COVID-19 among them. Those cases included 5,189 hospitalizations and 1,063 deaths. 
 That data shows that among vaccinated people, approximately 0.0033% were hospitalized and 0.00067% died, said Cindy Prins, an epidemiologist at the University of Florida.
 "So those are extremely rare events," Prins said.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, "it’s not accurate that you won’t get COVID-19 if you’re vaccinated. We have seen enough breakthrough cases to know that for sure. And even the efficacy and effectiveness data show that the vaccines don’t prevent all cases of COVID-19," Prins said.
 It’s difficult to quantify the total number of breakthrough cases. The CDC stopped collecting data on all breakthrough cases in May and is now only collecting data on vaccinated people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized or die.
 A CDC spokesperson told PolitiFact in May that zeroing in on severe breakthrough cases is meant to provide vaccine researchers with more reliable data on the cases they’re most concerned about, since not all people with breakthrough infections can be identified, particularly those with asymptomatic or mild illness who do not get tested.
 But even when the CDC was tracking breakthrough cases broadly, they were rare. The data that the CDC collected before May 1 show that, of 101 million people vaccinated in the U.S., 10,262 (0.01%) experienced breakthrough cases, Prins said. 
 "Bottom line: You can still get COVID-19 if you’re fully vaccinated, but that’s not common, and hospitalizations and deaths from breakthrough cases are very rare," Prins said. "Being vaccinated absolutely helps to prevent COVID-19 infection, and definitely helps to prevent severe disease and death from COVID-19."
 We heard similar comments from other experts including Dr. Amesh Adalja, an expert on infectious disease at the Johns Hopkins University Center for Health Security. 
 "Breakthrough infections are extremely rare, and when they are detected are often clinically insignificant and/or the result of testing asymptomatic fully vaccinated (people) against CDC guidance," Adalja said. "It is even more unlikely that you are going to develop COVID-19 symptoms severe enough to require hospitalization if you’ve been fully vaccinated."
 Our ruling
 Biden said, "You’re not going to get COVID if you have these vaccinations." 
 Biden exaggerated. CDC data shows that fully vaccinated people have gotten COVID-19, but these cases are rare. But it’s important to note that vaccinated people are far more likely to avoid hospitalization or death. 
 We rate this statement Half True.
 RELATED: Fact-checking Tomi Lahren on vaccines and COVID-19 survival chances
 RELATED: CDC is not manipulating its COVID-19 breakthrough data — it’s changing how it collects it
Republican Sen. Roy Blunt of Missouri took to Twitter to express his frustration with Senate Democrats who voted against his budget amendment last month. The amendment sought to reopen in-person schooling after the coronavirus pandemic shuttered it last year.
 "I recently offered an amendment to the budget bill that would have helped get kids back in school after teachers were vaccinated," the Feb. 25 tweet read. "Every single Senate Democrat voted against it."
 The reason they voted against it, he said, was political.
 "It's very clear this isn’t about safety or science. It’s pure politics & kids are paying the price," the tweet read.
 Blunt joined South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott on the budget amendment. The congressional record shows that Democrats uniformly panned it. 
 Blunt’s tweet doesn’t say whether Democrats had another plan to help schools. They did.
 So, what was in the proposal that made so many Democrats say no? Was it pure politics? 
 The answer may lie in the carrot versus the stick. 
 Withholding money to schools 
 Blunt’s amendment centered on penalties rather than straight aid that Democrats proposed. His proposal would have allowed Congress to limit or withhold COVID-19-related emergency relief to K-12 schools that did not reopen for in-person learning after their teachers received vaccinations.
 Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., the assistant majority leader, said Democrats voted against it because they objected to a punitive approach.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This amendment would’ve prohibited schools from getting critical resources to implement public health protocols," Murray’s office said in a statement to PolitiFact Missouri.
 "And as a result, this amendment would’ve made it that much harder for schools to re-open for in-person instruction. The best way to ensure our schools can safely reopen as soon as possible is to get schools the resources they need, not to impose one-size-fits-all mandates from Washington on them."
 Murray’s team also said that vaccines are just one piece of safely returning to in-person learning.
 "Safely reopening schools also means providing schools with the resources they need to implement public health protocols including effective physical distancing, consistent mask-wearing, ventilation, COVID-19 testing, contact tracing, and more," the statement said.
 The bill passed by the Senate last week included those resources in the $1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief bill. The bill allocates $128 billion for primary and secondary schools, including money to support remedial instruction over time. Just 5% of the money for local schools comes in fiscal year 2021.
 Blunt’s team pointed us to his most recent remarks on the matter. In these remarks, Blunt emphasized the importance of getting kids back in school.
 Our ruling
 Blunt said that he "offered an amendment to the budget bill that would have helped get kids back in school after teachers were vaccinated" and that "every single Senate Democrat voted against it."
 This leaves out an important detail: The amendment threatened to withhold relief funding from schools that didn’t reopen in-person learning. 
 Blunt framed Democrats’ opposition to his amendment in narrow terms, making it appear as though they opposed getting kids back in school when they really opposed his punitive approach. The COVID-19 relief bill that Democrats passed included funding to help schools.
 We rate this statement Half True.
A North Carolina congressman claims the Democrats’ proposed stimulus plan has very little to do with the coronavirus.
 The "American Rescue Plan" calls for $1.9 trillion in spending. 
 "There’s about 9% of it actually going to COVID, meaning 91% of it is not even COVID-related," Republican. Rep. Ted Budd said in a speech, which he tweeted.
 Is Budd right about those percentages?
 The first part of Budd’s quote is accurate. Expert analysis shows a small percentage of the spending is directed at combating the virus through vaccines, protective equipment or resources for health care providers.
 But that doesn’t mean the rest of the bill isn’t related to COVID-19. A significant percentage of the bill aims to address the financial fallout caused by the pandemic.
 Combatting COVID
 Experts we spoke with put the bill’s spending into three categories: coronavirus containment, things that are tightly or loosely related to the pandemic, and things that shouldn’t be considered related at all.
 Let’s look first at spending that directly targets COVID-containment. Depending on how COVID-containment is measured, the cost ranges between $100 billion and $160 billion. 
 The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a group focused on reducing federal deficits, put COVID-19 "containment" efforts at $110 billion, or 6% of the bill. The group put vaccine-related activities in a separate group costing about $17 billion, less than 1% of the entire bill. 
 For his part, President Joe Biden said $160 billion would go towards COVID-19 testing, protective gear, vaccine production and distribution. Even if we take this higher number, that would mean the funds directed to fight COVID account for roughly 8.4% of the $1.9 trillion. 
 That means the first part of Budd’s claim is nearly spot-on.
 What’s COVID-related?
 But the second part of his claim is off-base. While a lot of the proposed spending doesn’t directly go toward combating COVID, that doesn’t mean it’s not related to the coronavirus. 
 A significant portion is designed to offer economic relief to businesses and people affected by the pandemic.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Perhaps the most famous part of the plan, direct stimulus payments to individuals, is estimated to cost more than $420 billion. The plan would also extend unemployment benefits and offer financial aid to help schools reopen. 
 Erica York at the Tax Foundation and Stan Veuger at the American Enterprise Institute both described economic relief efforts as "COVID-related."
 "Whether you think they’re wise or not, they’re clearly a response to the economic crisis," Veuger said in a phone interview.
 The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget reported that $246 billion would go toward extending unemployment benefits through August and raising the federal supplement payment — a move that would account for roughly 13% of the budget. The Congressional Budget Office also said the proposed unemployment benefits would cost $246 billion. The unemployment benefits, combined with a $400-a-week supplement to state unemployment insurance payments, would cost a combined $350 billion, PolitiFact reported.
 The CRFB reported that $130 billion, or 7%, would go toward helping schools reopen safely.
 We asked Budd whether he believes the extension of unemployment benefits is unrelated to the COVID-19 crisis. Spokesman Curtis Kalin didn’t directly answer the question. He said Budd wants to reopen the country. For aid, he said the federal government could use the $1 trillion that hasn’t been spent yet — a claim we’ve rated Half True.
 Not COVID-related
 To be clear, the bill does include proposals that experts don’t necessarily see as pertinent.
 "The Democratic proposal is going beyond what we’ve seen in past relief measures by significantly expanding existing tax credits and making changes to the international tax system," York said. 
 "For instance, lawmakers are proposing expanding the child tax credit," she said. "Opponents might argue that’s wish list and isn’t a speedy form of relief, but proponents might argue it’s COVID-related because the pandemic and downturn have disproportionately affected lower-income households and so policies are being targeted toward the affected populations."
 In total, the CRFB estimates the House Democrats’ relief package includes "at least $312 billion of policies that have little to do with the current crisis." The group cited the $110 billion to expand the Child Tax Credit and $50 billion to expand health care access through the Affordable Care Act.
 The CRFB proposed alternative plans costing $1.3 trillion and $1.1 trillion, respectively. Meanwhile, a group of Republican senators proposed a $600 billion plan. 
 Our ruling
 Budd said about 9% of Biden’s stimulus plan "is actually going to COVID, meaning 91% of it is not even COVID-related."
 In the first part of his statement, Budd accurately describes the proposed spending on efforts to combat the virus itself. 
 However, he’s wrong to suggest the rest of the bill isn’t related to COVID-19 at all. He may disagree with how much the bill would spend on unemployment insurance and other financial relief efforts. But the bill does aim to address the financial cost of the pandemic.
 His statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
As more people are infected with COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, many are wondering: Am I next? 
 The odds may not be in our favor, according to a recent Facebook post. 
 "Harvard scientists just predicted that it may take many months to find cure for coronavirus," the March 10 post says. "According to them, virus is spreading so fast that it will infect 70% of humanity this year." 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Spokespeople for Harvard University did not immediately reply to PolitiFact’s emails asking about the post. 
 But news stories lend some credence to the Facebook post’s claims — and provide more information that the post fails to mention. 
 On March 11, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic that has infected nearly 120,000 people worldwide. More than 4,000 people have died and eight countries, including the United States, are currently each reporting more than 1,000 cases.
 Mark Lipsitch, an epidemiologist at Harvard’s Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics and an expert on viruses, told CBS News, among other news outlets, that 40% to 70% of the world’s adult population could be infected in the coming year. 
 There are an estimated 7.6 billion people in the world, and an estimated 329 million in the United States, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. Adults make up about three-quarters of the U.S. population. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "That is a projection," Lipsitch said during the March 2 interview, "so we will find out if that’s accurate as things go on. It is the best estimate that I’ve been able to make based on a combination of the mathematical models that we use to track and predict epidemics."
 Other estimates are similar. The Guardian reported on Feb. 11 that 60% of the global population could be infected if the virus is unchecked. On Feb. 13, Bloomberg reported that Ira Longini, an adviser to the World Health Organization, said two-thirds of the world’s population could catch COVID-19. 
 But the publication also quoted David Heymann, an infectious disease expert at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, explaining that researchers need more data to get a better idea of how far the coronavirus could spread. 
 "The models will be refined as more information comes to light," he said. 
 Our ruling
 The Facebook post says Harvard scientists say the coronavirus is "spreading so fast that it will infect 70% of humanity this year." 
 An epidemiologist at the university has said that 40% to 70% of the world’s adult population could be infected in the coming year. 
 But that is a projection, and other projections vary. 
 We rate this post Half True.
A $600-per-week boost in unemployment benefits, part of the federal government’s $2 trillion stimulus response to the coronavirus outbreak, has sparked some backlash.
 As the bill neared final approval, Sen. Lindsey Graham, R.-S.C., was widely quoted as saying the bonus would incentivize people not to work and, in effect, force employers to compete with a $24 minimum wage.
 It didn’t take long for this claim to appear on Facebook:
 "Unemployment now pays $24/hour even if your wages were lower. Why don’t ‘essential’ people forced to still work get $24 too?"
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The stimulus does not specify unemployment payments at a rate equivalent to $24 per hour — though, as a result of the $600 temporary boost, some unemployed people will receive weekly unemployment payments at that rate. 
 Furthermore, the stimulus does not boost pay for people still on the job, including essential workers who earn less than $24 per hour.
 Who’s eligible for the $600
 President Donald Trump signed the stimulus bill — known as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act — into law on March 27, 2020. 
 The law includes what is known as the federal pandemic unemployment compensation provision. The temporary provision adds a bonus of $600 per week, for up to four months, to what you would already receive in state-based unemployment payments. 
 Self-employed people, independent contractors and gig economy workers, who were not previously eligible for standard unemployment benefits, are now eligible through Dec. 31, 2020.
 The same law offers the same $600 per week of federal add-on assistance for out-of-work self-employed, contractor, gig and part-time workers as it does for full-time workers. The bonuses began April 5, 2020 and are available through July 31, 2020.
 $24 per hour only for some
 Here’s how Graham came up with $24 per hour, or at least close to it, according to his Senate staff:
 In South Carolina, the maximum weekly unemployment benefit is $326. If you add the $600 federal bonus, that’s $926 per week. For a 40-hour work week, that comes to $23.15 per hour. (In some interviews about the $600 bonus, Graham said that would amount to $23 per hour.)
 So that’s pretty close to $24 per hour. But again, it’s only for the unemployed in South Carolina receiving the maximum weekly unemployment payment.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular unemployment benefits vary by state. South Carolina’s maximum is on the lower end, according to the latest Congressional Research Service report, from July 2019. The highest maximum, $1,192 per week, is in Massachusetts, which is among 11 states that add benefits for unemployed people with dependents.
 Nationally, regular unemployment covers half your wages, up to a cap of about $450 in regular earnings per week, Heidi Shierholz, former chief economist at the U.S. Department of Labor, told PolitiFact. So, a person who normally earns $450 would receive $225 in regular unemployment benefits, plus the $600 bonus, or $825 per week — more than their regular pay. That’s about $21 per hour.
 Viewed another way, as of January 2020, the average weekly unemployment benefit was $385 per week, Gary Burtless, a senior fellow in economic studies at the Brookings Institution, told PolitiFact. Add $600 to that and that comes to more than $24 per hour.
 But that’s based on an average, not a national standard.
 Burtless noted that unemployment payments vary not only by state, but also within a state from one recipient to another, because the benefit depends on each worker’s earnings record.
 Why $600?
 Asked by Fox News talk show host Sean Hannity why the higher unemployment payments aren’t capped at what a recipient made on the job, Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin said state unemployment offices have 35-year-old computer systems, and a more complicated unemployment aid formula would have taken months to set up.
 "The simplest way was, and the fairest way was, $600 per person," Mnuchin said. "In certain states, that might be a little bit too much money; in other states, it’s less money. It’s not a perfect system, but the president’s objective was to make sure you get money in people’s hands."
 No boost for the employed
 The main complaint of the Facebook claim, though, seemed to be that people who are still employed but earning less than $24 per hour aren’t getting bonuses to boost them to that level.
 Most adults will receive a one-time stimulus payment of $1,200, which is expected to occur in April 2020. But that goes to the unemployed as well as the employed.
 In short, there is no additional pay from this stimulus package for people who remain employed. That includes people in essential jobs such as grocery store clerks, delivery workers, food and medical supply-chain workers, and lower-paid hospital staff.
 An earlier federal stimulus law — the Families First Coronavirus Response Act — gave all American businesses with fewer than 500 employees funds to provide employees with paid leave, either for the employee’s own health needs or to care for family members. That will help many workers who previously didn’t get paid sick leave from their employer.
 Our ruling
 The post says, "Unemployment now pays $24/hour, even if your wages were lower. Why don’t ‘essential’ people forced to still work get $24, too?"
 This is an oversimplification. Other than a one-time stimulus payment of $1,200 that will go to most employed and unemployed adults, the latest federal stimulus law responding to the coronavirus outbreak does not contain any additional provision to boost the pay of workers still employed, including those in essential jobs earning less than $24 per hour.
 In addition, the law gives a $600-per-week boost in unemployment payments, meaning that some recipients will receive payments equivalent to a $24 hourly rate.
 However, the law does not specify that weekly unemployment payments be the equivalent of $24 per hour. Unemployed Americans who live in states with less generous unemployment benefits will receive less. 
 The statement is partially accurate but needs additional context, so our rating is Half True.
Ahead of his announcement that Texas would commence the second phase of its reopening after a statewide stay-at-home order had lifted, Gov. Greg Abbott celebrated "GREAT NEWS" for the state in a tweet.
 "The number of Texans who have RECOVERED from #COVID19 now exceeds the number of active COVID cases for the past 2 days," Abbott said. "That’s exactly what we want to see. Texas ranks 3rd highest among states for number of people who have recovered from #coronavirus."
 Abbott had announced that he would allow the statewide stay-at-home order he issued on April 2 to expire on the last day of April, allowing retail stores, restaurants, movie theaters and malls to open, with limited capacity, on May 1.
 At the time, Abbott said he would commence the second phase of his reopening plan by May 18, assuming there was no secondary "flare-up" of COVID-19 cases in the state.
 But on Tuesday, Abbott said coronavirus metrics for the state signaled that it would be appropriate to start the second phase of his plan ahead of schedule, allowing barbershops, and hair, nail and tanning salons to open at limited capacity later in the week.
 Ahead of his this announcement, Abbott shared the statement we’re checking and said Texas is the third highest in the nation for the number of people who have recovered from the coronavirus.
 But what does that number mean?
 Recovery statistics are not a factor that indicate a state’s readiness to reopen, according to guidelines from the White House.
 The guidelines, released in April, highlight certain criteria states should meet before opening: a downward trajectory of COVID-19 or flu-like symptoms, a downward trajectory of positive tests as a percent of total tests and a robust testing program for healthcare workers, including antibody testing.
 The number of recoveries is also not a metric used to calculate the prevalence (current cases) or incidence (new cases) of an infectious disease, according to Dr. Myron Cohen, director of the Institute for Global Health and Infectious Diseases at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill’s School of Medicine.
 "Recovery, even if it were measured properly, does not reflect interventions because we have almost none," Cohen said. "Such statistics are generally used to measure the success of a health care system when testing and treatments might be robust."
 Examining recoveries
 The raw counts of recovered cases available show that Texas does rank third, but there is a lot to unpack with this data. Abbott’s office did not return a request for comment seeking information about the data behind his statement.
 The main difficulty in weighing the statement is the quality of the data on recoveries. Fourteen states do not have current recovery data recorded by the COVID Tracking Project, an organization launched by The Atlantic that collects and publishes data from each state’s health agencies on the virus.
 The group’s website warns that data on patient outcomes, including hospitalizations, deaths and recoveries is "less consistently reported" than other data, like the number of tests administered.
 A visit to the website of each of these 14 states’ health authorities did not turn up any data on recoveries.
 There are also different definitions for what it means to have recovered from COVID-19. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has offered guidance on this front, but says that states and local health authorities can adapt the guidance as needed.
 The guidance outlines different standards, based on whether an individual has tested positive for the virus and whether the person is displaying symptoms. It also depends on whether a person is caring for themselves at home or has been in the care of a physician.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A person without symptoms can discontinue isolation, as long as at least 10 days have passed since first testing positive for COVID-19 and the individual did not later develop symptoms. In cases where symptoms are present, it depends on when the person last had a fever and when symptoms show signs of letting up.
 In places with ample testing supplies, the CDC recommends a "test-based strategy" for assessing whether a person is still sick.
 In Texas, the number of patients recorded as recovered is an estimate "based on several assumptions related to hospitalization rates and recovery times, which were informed by data available to date. These assumptions are subject to change as we learn more about COVID-19," according to the state’s coronavirus dashboard.
 But even using the limited data available, there is also the size of the state’s population to consider.
 Given that Texas is the second most populous state, it makes more sense to consider the rate of recovery by state — the number of people who have recovered from COVID-19 relative to the total number of those infected — than the total number of recoveries.
 Looking at the numbers
 When Abbott shared this tweet on May 4, the latest coronavirus figures from Texas were as follows: 407,398 tests administered with 32,332 positive results, 884 deaths and 16,090 recoveries.
 Looking just at the cumulative number of recoveries at this date, Texas ranks third among all 37 states and Washington D.C. that have statewide recovery data available.
 New York recorded the most recoveries, with 58,950, followed by Louisiana, with 20,316. New York has reported far more cumulative coronavirus cases than any other state (318,953 as of May 4), and Louisiana has been a hot spot for the virus, although it has reported fewer cases than Texas.
 In March, Abbott instituted a mandatory quarantine order for travelers arriving in the state from various coronavirus hot spots, including New York and Louisiana. At the end of April, Abbott removed Louisiana from the list. 
 Travelers from California, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey and Washington and the cities of Atlanta, Chicago, Detroit and Miami are still required to self-quarantine for two weeks upon their arrival in Texas.
 Recovery rate
 At the time of Abbott’s claim, nearly half of all people who tested positive for coronavirus had been reported as recovered — a recovery rate of 49.76%.
 Using this figure to compare across the 37 states and Washington D.C. that have recovery data, Texas ranks 16th using this measure.
 Montana has the highest recovery rate, as more than 88% of the 457 people who tested positive have been reported as recovered.
 Our ruling
 Abbott said Texas ranks third among states for the number of people who have recovered from the coronavirus.
 The available figures on cumulative COVID-19 recoveries by state show that Texas ranks third — but that data has limitations. For one, just 37 states and Washington D.C. have been recording data on recoveries. Also, different standards are in place for determining whether a patient has recovered.
 In Texas, the statewide figure for recoveries is an estimate based on hospitalization data.
 Plus, a better metric for comparison is the recovery rate of the virus, given Texas’ population size. Using this measure, Texas ranks 16th among those states with data.
 Abbott’s statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. We rate this claim Half True.
President Joe Biden took some credit for school reopenings, tying increases in in-person learning to his administration’s efforts to vaccinate educators and send money to schools.
 "Back in February, when many of our schools were fully or partially closed, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — the CDC — issued guidelines to help reopen our schools safely," Biden said April 21. "Then, in March, Congress approved the American Rescue Plan to fund the safe reopening of our schools."
 But educators were anxious about going back to the classroom without being vaccinated and many parents were nervous about sending their children, Biden said. 
 "So, on March the 2nd, I launched a program directing all states to make educators, school staff, school bus drivers, child care workers eligible for vaccination in every state so that schools and child care centers could open with a peace of mind," Biden said. "Within a month, 80% had received at least one shot, and schools and child care centers all over the country are reopening." 
 It’s true that more schools have reopened from COVID-19-era closures in Biden’s first 100 days. But it’s hard to pinpoint how big a role the Biden administration played, as school communities were also influenced by other factors such as increased vaccinations, declines in cases, parent pressure and changes in state or local guidance. 
 The Biden administration prioritized increasing vaccine supply to the states, which led more adults, including teachers, to be vaccinated. But with 13,000 school districts nationwide, there was no overarching explanation for why or when local and state officials decided to reopen schools.
 CDC guidance on school reopenings faced criticism
 Early on, Biden and his administration gave conflicting messages about his school reopening goals. In December, he said he wanted to reopen the majority of schools during his first 100 days. But in January he narrowed that goal to apply to the majority of K-8 schools. 
 The CDC issued recommendations on Feb. 12 that called for reopened schools to employ universal masking, keep everyone 6 feet apart, clean regularly, and require quarantining and contract tracing for new cases. 
 The CDC also released a color-coded tool to guide reopening decisions based on weekly transmission levels. The controversial tool landed about 90% of the communities in the red zone due to high rates of transmission. By the guidelines, many middle and high schools would have had to close. Two public health experts concluded that the color-coded guidance would unnecessarily keep millions out of school.
 Some states such as Florida, which had been offering in person instruction since the fall, shrugged at the CDC’s guidance. 
 And one month later, the CDC generally shrank the 6-foot rule to 3 feet, except in some middle and high schools where transmission is high. 
 "The move from 6 feet to 3 feet was absolutely an accelerator for school reopenings," said Dennis Roche, president of Burbio, a firm that is tracking data on school reopenings.
 Just before the CDC issued the 3-foot guidance, Burbio found that school districts in multiple states were spacing desks by 3 feet as they converted to traditional in-person instruction from hybrid systems in which children attended school both online and in person. That trend continued in March and April with some districts citing the 3-foot rule in their decisions to fully reopen in person.
 On March 2, Biden said he was directing states to prioritize vaccinating teachers. But by that point, more than 30 states had already done so — and some states that hadn’t prioritized teachers had reopened schools anyway.
 The CDC found through federal data and surveys that nearly 80% of pre-K through 12th grade school staff and childcare workers received at least their first shot by the end of March.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biden also said the American Rescue Plan — which he signed into law in March — funded school reopening. While figures show almost $129 billion will go toward the Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund, Biden’s statement seems to ignore that most of that money is directed to be spent after 2021. 
 Schools have moved toward in-person learning throughout 2021
 There are two main ways to track weekly K-12 school openings: by school district or by students. The American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank, publishes a tracker that monitors over 8,500 public school districts on whether they’re operating with fully remote, hybrid or fully in-person learning. According to its metrics, about 5% of districts were fully remote as of mid-April, compared with about 20% a couple days before Biden took office. 
 Burbio, which tracks about 1,200 school districts, found that about 6% of students were in fully remote schools as of late April, compared with about half of students a couple days before Biden took office.
 The trackers show that schools have steadily moved toward in-person instruction in 2021. But we couldn’t find any evidence of a significant shift to in-person learning that was specifically tied to the CDC’s February guidance, Biden’s announcement that all teachers were eligible for vaccines, or the promise of American Rescue Plan money. 
 "The real answer is there was a lot of things pushing schools to reopen during this period and all sort of tailwinds for reopening, making it pretty hard to figure out which one is the one to look at," said Nat Malkus, an expert on K-12 education at the American Enterprise Institute.
 COVID-19 cases were declining in areas. Vaccinations were increasing. Parents were pressing schools to open. Pediatricians and health experts were urging a return to school. And some governors were advocating for more in-person instruction.
 Biden’s efforts probably helped some districts move toward reopening, Malkus said, but "as far as the overall trend, I don’t think you can give the Biden administration a lot of credit for driving it." 
 Sean R. Gill, a research analyst at the Center on Reinventing Public Education at the University of Washington, said he believes the actions of states and governors had more of an impact than Biden’s moves. "Even in California, they made some new state funds contingent on being open for in-person or hybrid learning," he said.
 Linda Darling-Hammond, president of the state board of education in California, credited both Biden and state action with fueling reopenings there. The dramatic increase in vaccine supply under Biden’s watch "made a big difference because many many districts were waiting on vaccines to get to teachers to reopen schools," she said. Similarly, school leaders were able to start counting on money that would be coming.
 Our ruling
 Biden says his administration’s efforts have led to more school reopenings.
 Biden cited guidelines issued by the CDC, his announcement to prioritize vaccinating educators and the passage of the American Rescue Plan.
 We found it’s difficult to pinpoint the factors that drove more schools to reopen in 2021. While some of the Biden administration’s actions helped, many states and schools were already moving toward more in-person learning when those initiatives were announced. Other factors also played a role, including COVID-19 infection rates, overall vaccination rates, pressure from parents and decisions by local and state officials. 
 We rate this statement Half True.
 RELATED: Evaluating President Joe Biden’s first 100 days in office
 RELATED: Capito correct that school funding in Biden’s relief bill extends through 2028
 RELATED: COVID-19 far less dangerous to kids, but wrong to say they ‘are not affected’
Gov. Ralph Northam announced that Virginia has received decontamination systems that will help provide front-line health workers with protective equipment against COVID-19.
 Each of the systems can massively sanitize for reuse much-sought-after N95 face masks. The systems were developed by the Battelle Memorial Institute, a nonprofit technology company in Ohio, and received emergency authorization from the Food and Drug Administration.
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency has been sending the equipment, free of charge, to various locations. Northam announced during a May 1 news conference that Virginia has gotten three of the systems, to be located in Chesterfield County, Newport News and Blacksburg. 
 "These systems have multiple units that are each the size of a storage container and can clean up to 80,000 masks per day using a hydrogen peroxide vapor," Northam said. "(Personal protective equipment) can be decontaminated and reused 20 times without degrading."
 Traditionally, N95 masks have been designated for only single use. So we fact-checked Northam’s statement that the system allows the masks to be "decontaminated and reused 20 times without degrading."
 The Battelle process
 Hospitals send the masks to N95 sanitization centers Battelle has helped set up, including in coronavirus hot spots such as New York, Boston, Seattle and Washington, D.C.
 Workers wearing protective gear load the respirators into a sealed container. Masks are cleaned with vapor-phase hydrogen peroxide, aerated and then sent back to the originating hospitals. The decontamination process takes about 12 hours.
 Battelle says the masks can withstand the decontamination process up to 20 times. But, as PolitiFact National recently noted, that’s not a best practice.
 The FDA, in its letter designating emergency approval, specified that Battelle’s decontamination system "may be effective" safely recycling masks 20 times, but it advised that recycling should only be done "when there are insufficient supplies." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also recommends reuse "only be practiced as a crisis capacity strategy."
 There are several reasons. For one thing, research is limited on how effective this type of decontamination is. Also, masks vary in how they stand up to the procedure.
 And it’s not as simple as doing a load of laundry. "Decontamination is a complicated process," said Hana El-Samad, a professor of biochemistry and biophysics at the University of California-San Francisco, who researches N95 sanitization. "Assessing how well it works and which N95 makes and models remain unaffected is an area of active research." 
 N95Decon, a research collaborative with which El-Samad works, has examined Battelle’s hydrogen peroxide approach and found the chemicals appear to eliminate COVID-19 spores without damaging the mask’s filtration.
 Mask integrity
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Performance is only part of the equation. Another is mask structure: N95s work only when properly fitted to the face.
 When workers reuse the masks, they can lose their shape, which undermines the quality of fit and renders them less protective. For some masks, per an N95Decon report on hydrogen peroxide, fit quality declined substantially after just five uses. For others, it took 15 wears to see a meaningful difference.
 In addition, decontamination itself can in some cases worsen the respirator’s fit. 
 "If [an N95] doesn’t fit well, then air will leak around the sides and it doesn’t matter how good a filter it is," said Patrick Kenney, medical director of the Yale-New Haven Health’s corporate supply chain.
 Plus, using this technology requires hospitals to have other protocols in place. Used masks must be safely collected ― since they could be COVID-contaminated and pose a biohazard — and a plan must be in place to move them to and from the sanitization facility. 
 "These are all complicated processes that need to be done right," El-Samad said.
 She offered a key takeaway: Technology like Battelle’s can help. But nothing substitutes for new N95s.
 We should note the PolitiFact National fact-checked an April 23 statement by President Trump. He said, "We’re also using a sterilization process ― some great equipment that will sterilize masks up to 20 times per mask. So that’s like ordering 20 times more masks."
 PolitiFact rated the statement Half-True, saying, "Government authorities and health care researchers are clear that this is a crisis measure and it is in no way as effective as ‘ordering 20 times more masks.’"
 Our ruling
 Northam said with decontamination systems being set up in Virginia, "PPE can be decontaminated and reused 20 times without degrading."
 The systems are excellent news for Virginia which, like practically all states, has struggled to acquire N95 masks for medical workers. But the governor’s words are still rosy.
 The FDA, in its letter of emergency approval, said the decontamination system "may be effective" safely recycling masks up to 20 times, but warned the process should only be used when there are "insufficient (new) supplies." Some early research suggests the structure of the masks may be compromised through the repeated process, making them less-secure fits on faces.
 So Northam’s statement is partially accurate, but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
If the coronavirus pandemic has forced you to work from home, you’ve perhaps met with your fellow remote colleagues on Zoom, a videoconferencing software that is now both noun and verb.
 But is it safe to send private messages while zooming? A recent warning on social media advises users to be careful. 
 
 "‘Private’ messages sent to individual people during a Zoom meeting show up in the end-of-meeting transcript along with all other public messages," reads the screenshot of a tweet. "Tell your friends, save a life."
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 We emailed Zoom about the Facebook post and heard back from a public relations firm working for the company. An associate told PolitiFact that if a person with recording privileges — i.e., the person hosting the meeting — decides to record a Zoom meeting to the cloud, then public messages are saved. Public messages are those sent to everyone in the meeting.
 But if a person with recording privileges records a meeting locally, on their computer, the chats that are saved include those that were sent publicly "as well as any private chat exchanges that the person recording participated in during the session." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In short: If you send a private message to the person recording the meeting, it could end up on a transcript. If you send a private message to another person in the meeting — someone who isn’t able to record the meeting — those messages won’t end up in the transcript. 
 Some PolitiFact staffers recently tested this and found it to be true. 
 One editor, who had downloaded the Zoom app on his Apple computer, recorded a meeting with other employees. After downloading the transcript of the meeting to his computer, he could only see private messages that were sent to him — not private messages between the participants. 
 If the person who recorded the meeting decided to share the transcript, people could then see any private messages you or others sent that person.
 "Remember that hosts can record audio and video from meetings in full, as well as keep a record of public chats," says one Wired story. "If you (the meeting host) save the chat log for yourself, it will also include private chats you’ve been involved in, so be very careful about sharing that file with anyone else. Don’t just post it in the group chat for everyone to read. If a host chooses to enable this setting, Zoom will notify you and give you a chance to opt out."
 There is no evidence that messages between people who don’t have recording privileges will show up in a transcript, however.
 We rate this post Half True.
Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards on CNN was asked whether Mardi Gras celebrations in his state should have been called off earlier this year, in light of Louisiana now being considered a hotspot in the coronavirus pandemic.
 In New Orleans, the Carnival parades and celebrations started early January and ended Feb. 25 on Mardi Gras (Fat Tuesday). It’s estimated that more than 1 million people go to New Orleans annually for the Carnival season and experts now believe the festivities fueled the outbreak.
 "The biggest Mardi Gras parades in Louisiana took place on Feb. 25, just as the national outbreak was starting. In retrospect, if you knew then what you know now, would you have canceled Mardi Gras?" CNN’s Jake Tapper asked Edwards on April 5.
 "Well, you know you don't get a do-over like that, Jake," Edwards said. "There was not a single suggestion by anyone, a doctor, a scientist, a political figure, that we needed to cancel Mardi Gras. And, you know, in February, we had a Super Bowl, and it wasn't canceled and so forth."
 Edwards’ comments echoed a similar statement from New Orleans Mayor LaToya Cantrell 10 days earlier on CNN that there were "no red flags" from federal officials to suggest the festivities should be aborted.
 PolitiFact wondered if it’s true that there were no suggestions back in January or February that mass gatherings like Mardi Gras be canceled.
 We reviewed statements from President Donald Trump, and guidance from federal and state public health agencies and found that Edwards was right. Public health professors in Louisiana also told PolitiFact that there was no suggestion, prior to Mardi Gras, of community spread in the United States, much less New Orleans.
 The earliest suggestion we found from a federal agency saying that large events may need to be canceled came Feb. 26, after Mardi Gras celebrations.
 Messaging from Trump
 On Twitter and in public remarks, Trump did not suggest that large public events be canceled. In India on Feb. 25 and before leaving for India on Feb. 23, Trump said the coronavirus was very "under control" in the United States.
 Trump tweeted about the virus at least eight times from January to Feb. 25.
 His tweets generally said that his administration was in contact with China and others about the coronavirus, offered praise for Chinese President Xi Jinping’s handling of the outbreak, and said that his administration was monitoring developments and had it under control.
 On Lundi Gras, the day before Mardi Gras, he tweeted: 
 The Coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant countries. CDC & World Health have been working hard and very smart. Stock Market starting to look very good to me!— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 24, 2020 
 
 Messaging from public health agencies
 When the U.S. declared the coronavirus a public health emergency on Jan. 31, the government did not say that mass gatherings be canceled.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Throughout January and most of February, U.S. officials said that the coronavirus risk to the American public was low and that they were not seeing community spread of the virus. By Feb. 25, there were 53 confirmed COVID-19 cases in the United States and no deaths, according to data compiled by the World Health Organization.
 On Feb. 26, the day after Mardi Gras, a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention doctor told reporters that the coronavirus situation was rapidly evolving and that the virus was spreading worldwide.
 There were still only a few cases in the United States and no reports of community spread, but that would eventually change, said Nancy Messonnier, director of the CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. She said there were mitigation guidelines that people and communities could take during a pandemic when there wasn’t a vaccine or proven medical treatment for the disease.
 "On a larger scale, communities and cities may need to modify, postpone, or cancel mass gatherings," Messonnier said. Local communities would need to figure out which guidelines to implement and when, she said, based on the severity and the transmission of the disease and what could be done locally.
 On Feb. 28, Messonnier said it was possible that a reported case in California "could be the first instance of community spread — meaning the illness was acquired through an unknown exposure in the community." But it could also be that the patient was exposed through contact to a traveler who was infected, Messonnier said. The immediate risk to the general American public remained low, she said.
 On Feb. 29, a health official from Washington state, where there were four presumptive cases of COVID-19, joined a CDC press briefing and said the state was "starting to see some spread in the community" and the public risk was increasing. "Should we start to see more spread in Washington, we might consider recommending measures like cancelling large public events," said Kathy Lofy, the state health officer at the Washington state department of health.
 There were no reported cases of coronavirus in Louisiana during the weeks-long Carnival celebrations. The state’s department of health in blog posts as late as Feb. 21 said that the coronavirus threat to Louisiana was very low and that people should be more worried about the flu. It recommended that people wash their hands and get a flu shot, since it was still flu season.
 Louisiana’s first presumptive case of coronavirus was reported March 9, two days before the World Health Organization declared the new coronavirus a pandemic. On March 13, when Louisiana had 33 presumptive positive cases of COVID-19, Edwards signed a proclamation to stop gatherings of more than 250 people and close all K-12 public schools statewide to slow the spread of the disease.
 Based on models created mid-March, it’s assumed that infections silently spread in crowded parades during Mardi Gras, said Susanne Straif-Bourgeois, an associate professor of epidemiology at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans. Soon after Mardi Gras, epidemiologists from nearby states began reporting confirmed cases of coronavirus in people who had traveled to New Orleans for the festivities. But at the time that parade-goers gathered in streets with family and friends, it was not known that the virus was in the state, Straif-Bourgeois said.
 In his CNN interview with Edwards, Tapper said the Washington Post reported that governors had a gala in Washington, D.C. in early February, and that a group of governors met with federal experts who gave "the same dire warning that they’re giving now."
 Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan told the Washington Post, "The doctors and the scientists, they were telling us then exactly what they are saying now."
 Edwards told Tapper that in that Feb. 9 briefing, "we spoke generally about the novel coronavirus" and that it was "not accurate to say that they gave the same sort of information that they are providing right now," since a lot more is now known about the virus.
 Edwards’ deputy chief of staff, Christina Stephens, told PolitiFact that at that briefing, the virus was described as low risk and there was no suggestion that large gatherings be canceled.
 In a Feb. 9 press release about the briefing, the U.S. Health and Human Services department said the task force "reiterated that while this is a serious public health matter, the risk to the American public remains low at this time, and that the federal government will continue working in close coordination with state and local governments to keep it that way."
 Our ruling
 Edwards said of the coronavirus threat, "there was not a single suggestion by anyone, a doctor, a scientist, a political figure, that we needed to cancel Mardi Gras."
 New Orleans Mardi Gras celebrations began early January and ended Feb. 25. PolitiFact reviewed public comments from Trump, federal and state health officials on and before Feb. 25 and did not find suggestions that large public events be cancelled. At that time, there was no report of community spread of the virus.
 Edwards’ statement is accurate. We rate it True.
Even as his state is a hotbed for COVID-19, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis has been pushing schools to reopen so parents have the choice of sending children back to the classroom or keeping them home to learn virtually.
 The Republican governor has said children without any underlying health conditions would benefit from in-person learning and the stimulation and companionship of being among other young people. He has also made clear that he thinks these benefits far outweigh what he considers to be minimal risks.
 "The fact is, in terms of the risk to school kids, this is lower risk than seasonal influenza," DeSantis said, during an Aug. 10 televised roundtable discussion on education.
 DeSantis’ assertion got us wondering, so we asked the governor’s office what evidence it had to back up the claim.
 Looking at the numbers
 A spokesperson responded with data from the Florida Department of Health showing the state’s COVID-19 mortality rate is 0.02% for people 24 and younger. That’s the same as the influenza mortality rate for this age group.
 But for children 14 and younger, the spokesperson said, Florida’s COVID-19 mortality rate is 0.009%, far below the 0.01% for flu for that age group.
 And the risk of death is not the only concern children face if infected by the COVID-19 virus. They can develop complications that require hospitalization.
 "The risk of complications for healthy children is higher for flu compared to COVID-19," according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "However, infants and children with underlying medical conditions are at increased risk for both flu and COVID-19."
 The CDC estimates there were 480 deaths among U.S. children due to flu in the 2018-19 season, including 136 cases where the virus was confirmed by laboratory testing.
 As of mid-August, 90 children died of COVID-19 in the United States, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics.
 More than 46,000 children were hospitalized for flu in that 2018-19 period. The hospitalization rate among children 5 to 17 was 39.2 children per 100,000 children.
 The hospitalization rate for COVID-19 is 6 per 100,000 children for those ages 5 to 17, according to the CDC.
 The number and rate of COVID cases in children in the United States steadily increased from March to July. "The true incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children is not known due to lack of widespread testing and the prioritization of testing for adults and those with severe illness," the CDC wrote recently.
 While children have lower rates of using a ventilator than adults, 1 in 3 children hospitalized with COVID-19 in the United States were admitted to the intensive care unit, the same rate as for adults, the CDC said.
 Dr. Chad Vercio, chair of pediatrics at Riverside University Health System in California, said DeSantis’ statement is partly true, with many caveats. Children’s risk from COVID-19 "entirely depends on how widespread COVID is in any area," he said.
 Data reflects a snapshot in time
 U.S. hospitalization rates for children with COVID are lower than for those with flu, Vercio said. But that could be due to parents keeping children home and schools being closed since March, he added. "It is unknown if these COVID hospitalization rates would rise when we open schools," he said.
 About two-thirds of Florida school districts have opened in the past two weeks with the rest planning to resume by Aug. 31. Most districts are offering in person classes while giving parents the option to keep students home for virtual learning. In South Florida, where the pandemic has hit hardest, districts are planning to at least initially only offer virtual teaching. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hillsborough County, which includes Tampa, had initially planned to reopen classrooms but reversed itself after doctors warned that school closures were likely to ensue. The county revised its plan to limit classes to only online instruction, but the state’s Education Commissioner rejected that approach, saying it denies parents the option of sending their children back to school. Fearing loss of millions in state funding, the district now plans to begin virtual learning for all students on August 24; and, on August 31, begin offering students the option to return to the classroom. 
 "The direct impact of COVID-19 on children is currently small in comparison with other risks and that the main reason we are keeping children at home is to protect adults," concluded a report in the British Medical Journal published in June. Still, health authorities say parents should make sure children practice good hygiene and limit playtime with other children.
 Based on data from February through mid-May, the report found 44 deaths from COVID-19 for people 19 and younger in France, Germany, Italy, Korea, Spain, England and the United States. In a typical three-month period, there would be 308 deaths from lower respiratory tract infections, including flu, in those countries.
 "At this stage of the pandemic, COVID appears to be less dangerous for children than influenza," said Sunil Bhopal, a co-author of the report and an academic clinical lecturer at Newcastle University in England.
 "We don't need to wait for a whole season because, even at its peak in most countries, COVID killed a smaller number of children than estimated influenza deaths averaged from across a year," Bhopal said.
 "While flu is likely to have caused more deaths than COVID, this may change as the pandemic progresses and major caution is necessary to ensure this doesn't change," said Bhopal, an honorary assistant professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
 Dr. Sean O’Leary, professor of pediatrics at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, said the growing number of U.S. deaths could be another reason to think about COVID-19 and children.
 "We do know for sure that schoolchildren are major drivers of influenza epidemics in the community and, though that is not as much the case with COVID, it doesn’t mean they can’t spread it," he said. 
 DeSantis also maintained that kids are less likely to spread COVID-19 than they are the influenza virus. However, experts cautioned that there’s still a lot that is unknown about children’s ability to transmit the virus to the people they interact with — parents, grandparents and even their teachers. The perceived risk for teachers, for instance, is at the root of a lawsuit between the state’s largest teacher’s union and the DeSantis administration. The Florida Education Association wants a Leon County judge to stop the state’s order forcing school districts to open classrooms for in-person learning by the end of August. 
 Dr. Gabriela Andujar Vazquez, an infectious disease specialist at Tufts Medical Center in Boston, said children are more likely to have zero or mild symptoms from COVID-19 compared with adults.
 "The bottom line is kids can get infected and they tend to have less severe disease," she said. But the concern over reopening school is that children could spread the disease to others, including adults who are more likely to develop complications.
 "Because schools are tied to the community — they are not in a bubble — and if community spread is not controlled in the community, it’s likely the school will reflect that," she said. One factor that can determine if disease is out of control is if positivity rates for people getting tested for COVID are over 5%. Many Florida counties have been well above that mark since June, although the rates have been dropping this month.
 Back-to-school risks will be handicapped based on the ability of the school to adopt physical distancing measures and enforce wearing of face masks, said Dr. Andrew Pavia, a pediatric infectious disease specialist at the University of Utah Health and Intermountain Primary Children’s Hospital.
 "This fall, we may see a lot of kids get infected as schools reopen, and those could be just the tip of the iceberg," he said. "Even though most kids have mild or asymptomatic cases, what I worry about is just how big is the tip of the iceberg," Pavia said.
 He also noted there is a vaccine for flu — which about 50% to 70% of children receive. "The vaccine is not perfect but does reduce the impact of the disease, and with COVID everyone is at risk and susceptible," Pavia said.
 Dr. Vidya Mony, an infectious disease expert with Santa Clara Valley Medical Center in San Jose, California, said data suggests COVID-19 is not as bad for children as flu and that children are not the main driver of the pandemic. But, she said, there isn’t enough data yet to say indisputably that the COVID-19 risk is lower. "We are learning something every day with this."
 Our ruling
 DeSantis said that COVID-19 is a lower risk for schoolchildren than is seasonal influenza.
 Studies show the number of COVID-related deaths and hospitalizations among children is lower than flu averages. Still, it’s uncertain if these lower rates among children were partly because schools were closed since March and whether those rates will rise as classrooms reopen this fall. It’s also unclear whether opening schools — particularly in communities with a high number of people testing positive — will lead to more spread of the disease.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
Former President Donald Trump didn’t appreciate the comments Dr. Deborah Birx made in a CNN report criticizing his administration’s handling of the coronavirus. 
 Birx, who was coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said the Trump administration failed to give the public clear, consistent guidance. She laid many deaths at the administration’s feet.
 "There were about 100,000 deaths that came from that original surge," Birx said in the March 28 broadcast featuring several doctors who advised Trump. "All of the rest of them, in my mind, could have been mitigated or decreased substantially."
 To date, the U.S. death toll is just shy of 550,000.
 Trump fired back. In a statement, he cast Birx and infectious-disease chief Anthony Fauci, who also appeared on the program, as "two self-promoters trying to reinvent history to cover for their bad instincts." He accused Birx of hypocrisy. 
 "Who can forget when Dr. Birx gave a huge mandate to the people of our nation to not travel, and then traveled a great distance to see her family for Thanksgiving — only to have them call the police and turn her in," Trump wrote March 29. "She then, embarrassingly for her, resigned."
 Birx did travel for Thanksgiving. Her family did not call the police. 
 Here are the details.
 Home for the holidays
 On Dec. 20, 2020, the Associated Press reported that the day after Thanksgiving, Birx traveled from Washington to a vacation property on Fenwick Island in Delaware, just off Maryland’s Eastern Shore. The group included her husband; a daughter and her husband; and two grandchildren. The 130-mile drive takes about two hours.
 The CDC Thanksgiving guidance recommended celebrating with "people in your household," and said that "staying home is the best way to protect yourself and others." If you do travel, it said, "always wear a mask in public settings and on public transportation." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Birx’s trip lasted about two days. During that time, she appeared on CBS News’ "Face the Nation," where she told young people who traveled for Thanksgiving, "you need to assume that you're infected and not go near your grandparents and aunts and others without a mask. We're really asking families to even mask indoors if they chose to gather during Thanksgiving."
 When the AP asked Birx about the trip, she said through a statement from her office that she "did not go to Delaware for the purpose of celebrating Thanksgiving." It was more for winterizing her vacation home, the statement said, although the group did share a meal during their stay.
 At a time when the public message was to stay home, the trip reflected badly on Birx as a public-health official. The AP article quoted two public health researchers who criticized Birx. Angela Rasmussen, a Georgetown virologist, said "this disqualifies her from any future government health position."
 Two days after the AP article, Birx said in an interview that she planned to retire, saying her position "has been very hard on my family," and that they had been dragged "into this."
 In that interview, Birx said she welcomed the chance to help the incoming Biden administration take the reins in fighting the pandemic. Formally, Birx held the position of ambassador-at-large at the State Department, where she had served as global AIDS coordinator. She stepped down on Jan. 20, 2021, the last day of Trump’s term.
 No police call
 There is no report that anyone in Birx’s family called the police. We reached out to Trump’s office for their source and did not hear back.
 The AP said the sister of Birx’s son-in-law brought the matter forward. Slate reported that the sister tipped off the AP and is estranged from the family. The AP said the woman acknowledged there was "family friction."
 Our ruling
 Trump said Birx "traveled a great distance to see her family for Thanksgiving — only to have them call the police and turn her in. She then … resigned."
 Birx took a two-hour drive with her daughter’s family to a vacation home the day after Thanksgiving. The sister of Birx’s son-in-law told the AP, not the police, about the trip. Birx soon announced she would retire, and she stepped down at the end of Trump’s term a month later.
 Trump invented and embellished the details, but broadly, the claim rates Half True.
As U.S. airlines tell their employees to get vaccinated against the coronavirus or risk getting fired, one company says it won’t terminate its unvaccinated workers, according to a Facebook post.
 The post is an image of text claiming Southwest Airlines "will no longer terminate employees over the mandate.""
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 But in this case, the post is accurate.
 
 
 
 Most major airlines in the United States are requiring employees to be vaccinated against the coronavirus. The moves followed President Joe Biden’s announcement in July that federal government employees and contractors would be required to verify their vaccination status. Many airlines are considered federal contractors, and Southwest has worked with the government to fly military personnel and mail for the U.S. Postal Service.
 Southwest announced on Oct. 4 that it would follow Biden's vaccine directive, saying in a statement that employees "must be fully vaccinated against COVID-19, or be approved for a religious, medical or disability accommodation, by Dec. 8, 2021, to continue employment with the airline."
 Eight days later, in an interview with "Good Morning America," Southwest CEO Gary Kelly said the company will follow Biden’s order, but won’t terminate any of its employees if they choose not to get vaccinated.
 "We’re not going to fire any employees over this. We are urging all of our employees to get vaccinated," Kelly said. "If they can’t get vaccinated, we are urging them to seek an accommodation."
 The company said in a statement to PolitiFact that it "does not want anyone to lose their job over this mandate." Employees have until Nov. 24 to submit proof that they are fully vaccinated or else request a religious or medical exemption. But according to comments Kelly made Oct. 21 in the company’s third-quarter earnings call, neither that deadline nor the federal government’s Dec. 8 deadline for contractors will result in Southwest workers losing their jobs.
 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "We're not going to fire anybody who doesn't get vaccinated," Kelly said. "Nobody is going to lose their job on December the 9th if we're not perfectly in compliance."
 Brandy King, a Southwest spokeswoman, told NPR it wanted to give "adequate time" for employees whose exemptions weren't granted after the deadline passes to get fully vaccinated. 
 Under Biden's order, unvaccinated individuals can continue to work as long as they wear a face-covering, physically distance themselves from other employees and customers, and undergo weekly COVID-19 testing.
 Meanwhile, United Airlines announced Oct. 13 that it was terminating 232 employees who refused to get vaccinated or seek an exemption by the company’s Sept. 28 deadline.
 RELATED VIDEO
 
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post claims that Southwest Airlines will no longer fire its employees who choose to remain unvaccinated against COVID-19.
 The company announced in early October that employees must be vaccinated or seek an exemption from the vaccine to continue employment.
 However, the company’s CEO later said that no one will be fired over the vaccine mandate, and that the airline will encourage unvaccinated workers to seek an "accommodation." Employees whose exemptions have not been processed or approved by Dec. 8 will remain employed, and the company will adhere to COVID-19 safety protocols as it encourages its unvaccinated workers to get the COVID-19 vaccine, according to the company’s spokesperson and its CEO.
 We rate this claim True.
Joe Biden berated President Donald Trump’s handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, saying in a recent speech in Delaware that Trump failed to take the necessary steps to get the virus under control.
 Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, said the administration stifled and scaled back the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s initial guidelines on reopening the country. 
 "The CDC tried to develop clear guidelines about what the stages of reopening should look like — the administration delayed and scaled them back," Biden said June 30.
 Did they? Here’s what we found out.
 CDC asked to revise guidelines 
 Biden’s campaign pointed us to a May 7, 2020, Associated Press report, which found that the Trump administration shelved part of a CDC document that contained step-by-step advice to local authorities on how and when to reopen businesses and public areas amid the pandemic. 
 The 68-page CDC report, titled "Guidance for Implementing the Opening Up America Again Framework," was supposed to publish on May 1, according to the AP, but the White House called it "too prescriptive." The White House told the agency revise its guide because it didn’t align with Trump’s strategy of giving states the final say. 
 The CDC released the approved 62-page report on May 20. (Some sections were released a few days earlier.) While it’s slightly shorter than the original, it still provides a detailed reopening roadmap for schools, camps, restaurants, child care facilities and transit organizations. 
 In a May 8 press briefing, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany countered that the CDC guidelines weren't ready and said that a rogue employee leaked a draft that was still in the editing process.
 After the final guidelines were released, she was asked in another briefing why Trump didn’t make an announcement. McEnany said that sections of the document were already out and different appendixes had to be discussed first.
 "The 60-page document was merely an aggregation of a lot of what was already out there, so it’s not as if this was new information that we were announcing, but it was more guidance pursuant to our ‘reopening of America’ guidance that was issued several weeks ago," McEnany said. 
 The CDC also said the guidelines are meant to be taken together with the White House’s reopening guidance issued on April 17, 2020. But the White House version makes clear reopening decisions are up to state and local officials, while the CDC’s version includes more details, such as recommendations to help businesses decide when to shut down in the case of future outbreaks. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The original plan also included instructions for faith-based organizations, which were stripped out of the final version. 
 CNN reported that this section was one of the main holdups for publishing the CDC documents, because the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights argued that faith-based organizations were being unfairly targeted. The department asked the CDC to ease social distancing recommendations for those groups, according to CNN, and encouraged federal health officials to let churchgoers congregate, saying that this aligned with the president’s agenda.
 The shelved CDC guide also recommended that nonessential travel should be avoided until the last phase of reopening, while the released version only mentions nonessential travel in relation to high-risk persons. The White House plan is looser on nonessential travel, too, and advises that communities "minimize" travel in Phase 1, and that in Phase 2, "non-essential travel can resume."
 Some health experts and officials have criticized the delay, saying that detailed recommendations should have been available earlier.
 "While it is not unusual for there to be White House review of forthcoming guidance, it is highly unusual for there to be a wholesale rewriting of guidelines at the request of the White House," said Jeffrey Levi, a professor of health policy and management at George Washington University. 
 "The holding back of recommendations regarding places of worship was particularly egregious given the high level of risk such indoor, mass gatherings can pose," Levi said. "The shorter versions that were first released diminished their effectiveness, since they didn’t provide as much detail as people needed to know how best to implement them. This delayed implementation of best practices — which could potentially have placed people at greater risk."
 But the CDC told PolitiFact the report’s revisions were part of a standard interagency process with the White House coronavirus task force.
 "There is an iterative effort to ensure effective, clear guidance is presented to the American people," said Benjamin Haynes, a spokesperson for the CDC. "As part of the Administration’s whole of government approach to combating COVID-19, the CDC followed an inter-agency process of drafting considerations and submitting them to the White House Task Force for review and comment before posting the guidance for states to safely reopen."
 PolitiFact reached out to the White House for comment but did not hear back.
 Our ruling
 Biden said that the Trump administration "delayed and scaled back" the CDC’s COVID-19 reopening guidelines. 
 Biden is mostly on target. The CDC said that the delays were caused by review and revision that was part of a standard process. Still, the White House did request that the public health agency revise its initial guidelines to align more with Trump’s approach of leaving reopening decisions up to state and local governments.
 We rate this Mostly True.
This headline on an article widely shared on Facebook seemed to drip with sarcasm:
 "A Miracle! Only 23 Americans Tested Positive for Flu Last Week Compared to 14,657 Cases Reported Last Year at Same Time."
 The Jan. 31 article from Gateway Pundit, a conservative website, started by asking: "Do you ever get the feeling you’re being lied to?" Then it claimed that the number of COVID-19 deaths has been "over-inflated," and it questioned whether the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is using "statistical tricks" in reporting flu cases.
 A post sharing the article was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 We’ve examined and debunked several claims suggesting there have been intentional overcounts of COVID-19 cases, and we thought this claim about flu cases deserved a closer look.
 Public health experts see a connection between the COVID-19 and flu case numbers, but not the one the article implies.
 Flu cases way down this year
 First the numbers, according to a CDC report on Jan. 16, 2021:
 For the week ended Jan. 16, of the 21,244 flu tests tracked by the CDC, 23 specimens, or 0.1%, tested positive. For the season to that point — 40 weeks, dating back to Sept. 27 — there were 1,159 positive specimens, or 0.2% of the total tested. 
 "Flu activity is unusually low at this time but may increase in the coming months," the CDC said in the report.
 More Week 2 results were released Feb. 5. The new totals show 62 of 38,572 specimens, or 0.16%, tested positive for flu.
 The headline we’re checking appears to take its second number from a different source: an article on Weather.com. That article compared the 23 cases to 14,657 positive flu tests — a rate of 29.6% — in Week 7 of the 2019-20 flu season.
 That isn’t an apples-to-apples comparison; it compares a week in 2020-21 with a different week in the 2019-20 season. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But a direct comparison shows flu cases are down dramatically.
 During Week 2 of the 2019-20 flu season, 9,277 of the 40,451 specimens were positive for influenza, or 22.9%, according to the CDC. 
 Decrease linked to COVID response
 "We are seeing a lot less influenza activity compared to previous seasons. This does also extend to other respiratory viruses that are usually up during this time of the year," said Dr. Werner Bischoff, medical director of Infection Prevention and Health System Epidemiology at the Wake Forest School of Medicine. 
 There’s no definitive data yet to explain the drop, but Bischoff and other experts say they suspect that precautions related to the coronavirus, along with high rates of flu vaccination, are helping to limit the spread of the flu.
 "My take, and this is not based on any evidence yet, is that the COVID-19 lockdown restrictions with masking, social distancing and frequent hand hygiene really cut down on transmission of these viruses," Bischoff said. "Influenza and most other respiratory viruses are spread by droplets. This combined with the seasonal influenza vaccine may have reduced the spread in the community to such a degree that the viruses have not been able to establish themselves to reach the usual numbers."
 A similar take was relayed in the Weather.com article that Gateway Pundit cited. 
 Weather.com included an excerpt from a Washington Post news story that said the rates of influenza A and influenza B, as well as other viruses, are at record lows, with experts theorizing that is largely due to the global shutdowns, mask wearing and other health protocols aimed at stemming the spread of the coronavirus.
 "It is likely that" COVID-19 mitigation measures have had an impact on influenza," said CDC spokesperson RED Denty. "Measures, including extensive reductions in global travel, teleworking, school closures, social distancing and face mask use may have played a role."
 Other experts have also cited COVID-19 social distancing efforts, including children staying home from school, as well as high rates of influenza vaccinations.
 Our ruling
 A headline from an article widely shared on Facebook claimed: "A Miracle! Only 23 Americans Tested Positive for Flu Last Week Compared to 14,657 Cases Reported Last Year at Same Time." The article cites this drop to suggest that health officials have improperly inflated the number of COVID-19 cases.
 Flu cases are down dramatically. The CDC reported that only 62 of 38,572 specimens tested positive for influenza for the week ended Jan. 16, 2021. A year earlier, the figure was 9,277. 
 Public health experts say they believe the drop is due not to a miracle or statistical tricks, but largely to social distancing and other precautions being used in response to the coronavirus pandemic.
 We rate the claim Half True.
North Carolina’s top health official says there’s evidence that a statewide mask requirement is helping stabilize coronavirus cases in the state.
 In a press conference on July 28, Health Secretary Mandy Cohen said:
 "Our actions to slow the spread of this virus are having an impact. Specifically, we see a direct correlation to the start of the statewide mask requirement at the end of June. Two to three weeks after implementing this requirement, we started to see the beginning of these more stable trends."
 Is it true that there’s a "direct correlation" between North Carolina’s mask requirement and COVID-19 stabilization?
 Data shows that the number of new reported COVID-19 cases is beginning to stabilize. Experts told PolitiFact the mask law and case count could be related, but that it’s hard to quantify the law’s impact.
 Cases leveling
 Gov. Roy Cooper announced the mask requirement on June 24 and it went into effect on June 26.
 Cohen said North Carolina’s case count started to level about three weeks later. Why is Cohen judging the rule’s effectiveness three weeks after its implementation, rather than immediately after its implementation?
 It can take up to 14 days between the time someone was infected and the time they start showing symptoms, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That means someone could have contracted the virus before the mask mandate, but not shown symptoms or tested positive until after the mask requirement was in effect.
 So let’s look at North Carolina’s case counts.
 
 One way experts measure coronavirus trends is by calculating the 7-day rolling average for the number of new cases or deaths per day. The N.C. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) and WRAL both track this metric.
 The average number of new cases per day rose until about July 18, when DHHS reported 2,481 cases. The daily count started to drop after that date, and the rolling 7-day average has been less than 2,000 cases ever since.
 What experts said
 So Cohen is right that the number of new cases is stabilizing. Is that a direct result of the mandate?
 There’s evidence that widespread mask-wearing has helped reduce the spread of the novel coronavirus, as we’ve previously reported. 
 We spoke with experts at the University of North Carolina, Harvard University, the University of Nebraska and the University of Toronto.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 While they agreed that there may be a correlation, they say there’s not enough evidence yet to determine how much influence the mask rule had on the stabilization.
 Other factors -- such as social distancing or testing availability -- could also play a role.
 But reviewing that data typically takes months, said Ryan McNamara, a research associate in UNC’s Department of Microbiology and Immunology. 
 "There's just a lot of variables at play that need to be accounted for," he said.
 There’s a popular saying in research: "correlation does not mean causation." In this context, it means that the mask law may not have caused the dip in new COVID-19 cases, even though there are signs a cause-and-effect relationship could exist.
 "That said, Dr. Cohen and her team are in possession of much more data than I am. I think her statement was carefully worded and has scientific merit."
 Ali Khan, dean of the College of Public Health and professor of epidemiology at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, agreed that it’s premature to directly credit the mask rule for the leveling-off of cases. 
 But he believes Cohen’s claim is fair, given that "other data that (shows) masks work and accounting for numerous caveats such as what else happened 2-3 weeks ago."
 Dr. Barry Bloom, a research professor of public health at Harvard University, said it’s "difficult to disaggregate a single intervention from the other standard public health behaviors."
 However, Bloom said it’s possible that the mask requirement not only prompted more people to wear masks -- but to start taking other precautionary measures as well.
 "I think it is safe to say they may have contributed to the more stable trends, assuming the trends are indeed stable for a couple of weeks," Bloom said. 
 As of August 3, the state’s rolling 7-day average remained below 2,000 cases and was still declining.
 Our ruling
 Cohen said there’s a "direct correlation" between North Carolina’s mask requirement and COVID-19 stabilization.
 Based on the data available in late July, experts said there does appear to be a correlation, but it’s too early to draw conclusions about it. Verifying the strength of the correlation can take months.
 The statement is accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate it Mostly True.
A headline circulating online contends that a study done in Israel shows that people who have recovered from COVID-19 have more protection from the virus than those who’ve only been vaccinated. 
 The headline is from an article on the conservative website Gateway Pundit, which calls the vaccine "experimental" and refers to Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s leading epidemiologist, as "fuhrer." The headline states:
 "New Israeli Study Finds Fully Vaccinated People are at "Greater Risk of Hospitalization" and 13 TIMES MORE LIKELY to Catch Covid-19 Than Those Who Have Recovered and Have Natural Immunity."
 The headline was shared in an Instagram post that was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The headline accurately reflects some of the study’s findings but ignores the study’s limitations, including that only one vaccine was tested, and that other studies have found that COVID-19 poses much greater danger to people who have not been vaccinated.
 Without that context, the headline leaves the impression that it’s safer to get COVID-19 and hope to recover than to try to avoid it by getting vaccinated. That’s not true.
 The study
 The study is what is known as a preprint, meaning it has not yet been vetted by experts. It was posted Aug. 25 on medRxiv.com, which added this note: "This article is a preprint and has not been peer-reviewed. It reports new medical research that has yet to be evaluated and so should not be used to guide clinical practice."
 The study was led by researchers at the Maccabi Research & Innovation Center at Maccabi Healthcare Services in Tel Aviv. They reviewed the records of patients in the Maccabi health system — 674,000 patients who were fully vaccinated and 105,000 who had been infected. Among the 105,000 who had been infected, 63,000 were unvaccinated and 42,000 had received one Pfizer dose three months after recovery.
 The researchers said the study is "the largest real-world observational study comparing natural immunity" gained from infection by the coronavirus, with immunity provided by the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine. They looked at patient records from June through August 2021, when the delta variant was dominant in Israel.
 They found:
 
 
 People who received both doses of the Pfizer vaccine in January or February 2021 were 13 times more likely to get a breakthrough infection with the delta variant than unvaccinated people who had COVID-19 during the same period were to be reinfected. 
 
 
 Over a longer period of time — with infection occurring anytime from March 2020 to February 2021, when different variants were dominant in Israel — fully vaccinated people in the study were six times more likely to become infected and seven times more likely to experience "symptomatic disease" than unvaccinated people in the study.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The study "demonstrated that natural immunity affords longer lasting and stronger protection against infection, symptomatic disease and hospitalization due to the delta variant," compared with the Pfizer two-dose vaccine-induced immunity, although previously infected people gained additional protection with a single dose of the vaccine.
 
 
 Caution in interpreting the findings
 The study has been well received by some experts as an indicator of the strength of natural immunity. But it has limitations, including the fact that it was done through record reviews, which are limited by biases in health care seeking behavior — such as testing, mask wearing and social distancing — that may differ among the groups compared, said Dr. Matthew Laurens of the Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health at the University of Maryland.
 "This type of study design is not as robust as a prospective study that follows individuals forward in time, testing them at regular intervals and collecting data on symptoms systematically," he said. "Prospective studies should be done to determine if these findings can be replicated.
 Gauging immunity by comparing COVID-19 reinfection rates among the unvaccinated with breakthrough infections among the vaccinated ignores the dangers of contracting COVID-19 in the first place and the protections against severe illness that vaccines provide. As we’ve reported:
 
 
 As of late July, vaccinated people represented a higher percentage of new COVID-19 cases in Israel than those who are unvaccinated. (This is not unexpected, because Israel has a high overall vaccination rate.) But among Israelis who were fully vaccinated and experienced breakthrough infections, the COVID-19 vaccine was 88% effective in preventing the need for hospitalization and 91% effective against severe illness.
 
 
 Israel’s early vaccine campaign, which resulted in more than 60% of its population being fully vaccinated, led to huge reductions in serious cases and deaths in the country.
 
 
 In August, we rated False a claim that it’s safer to be unvaccinated than vaccinated. Studies of the general adult population in the United States show that the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech vaccines have an 86% to 89% effectiveness rate against infection, and a 96% effectiveness rate against hospitalization, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Early evidence for the Johnson & Johnson/Janssen vaccine also demonstrates effectiveness against COVID-19, but more studies are underway, CDC said.
 
 
 "The suggestion that you might be better off getting infected versus vaccinated does not take into account the inherent risks associated with COVID-19 infection, including death," Laurens said. "Vaccination is the best prevention. This has been clearly shown in multiple prospective, randomized, double-blinded clinical trials, which are the very highest quality for clinical studies."
 Experts told the journal Science that seeking immunity through deliberate infection would put unvaccinated people at significant risk of severe disease and death, or the lingering, significant symptoms of what has been dubbed Long COVID.
 The Maccabi study shows the benefits of natural immunity, said University of Washington immunologist Marion Pepper, but "doesn’t take into account what this virus does to the body to get to that point." 
 Our ruling
 A headline widely shared on social media stated: "New Israeli study finds fully vaccinated people are at ‘greater risk of hospitalization’ and 13 times more likely to catch COVID-19 than those who have recovered and have natural immunity."
 The study, which has not been peer reviewed, found that people who had been infected with COVID-19 had greater protection against becoming reinfected with the virus’ delta variant than vaccinated people had against infection.
 But the headline’s suggestion that people are better off going unvaccinated ignores the fact that peer-reviewed studies repeatedly have found that vaccinated people are more likely to avoid hospitalization or death if they become infected.
 The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
Washington Gov. Jay Inslee, who issued some of the earliest social-distancing orders of any governor to combat the spread of the coronavirus, took issue with President Donald Trump’s tweeted solidarity with protesters in several states who were demanding an end to stay-at-home orders.
 On April 17, Trump tweeted, "LIBERATE MICHIGAN," "LIBERATE MINNESOTA," and "LIBERATE VIRGINIA," apparently referring to demonstrations at state capitols where protesters called for lifting restrictions aimed at preventing the spread of the coronavirus.
 On the April 19 edition of ABC’s "This Week," host George Stephanopoulos asked Inslee, a Democrat, for his reaction to Trump’s tweets.
 Inslee responded:
 "We have an order from governors, both Republicans and Democrats, that basically are designed to protect people's health, literally their lives, (only) to have a president of the United States basically encourage insubordination, to encourage illegal activity. These orders actually are the law of these states. And, again, these are not just Democrats. These are Republican-led states as well. To have an American president to encourage people to violate the law, I can't remember any time during my time in America where we have seen such a thing."
 We wondered whether it’s accurate to call state stay-at-home orders "laws," and whether they conflict with freedoms of speech and assembly under the First Amendment. So we asked legal experts.
 They agreed that while most fall under the heading of "proclamations" or "executive orders," they were issued under legal authority delegated by legislatures, meaning that have the same practical effect. The orders also would have a good chance of being deemed constitutional in court, they said.
 What have governors ordered?
 By now, most states have issued a stay-at-home order and/or requirements for business closures. (The National Governors Association has the complete list.) 
 However, most of these were not laws passed by the legislature and signed by the governor — the typical way of passing a state law. Instead, many of them have been made through executive orders, such as California, Colorado, Connecticut, and Illinois. Others have been made in the form of a "proclamation," such as the orders in Louisiana; a "directive," as was issued in Utah; or simply an "order," as in Idaho.
 In Inslee’s case, he signed a proclamation establishing stay-at-home rules for Washington state.
 A spokesman for Inslee said, however, that the proclamation was tantamount to a law, because it was made under authority delegated to the governor’s office by another law that had been passed the conventional way.
 Inslee’s order was enacted under Washington’s emergency powers law, which authorizes him to "proclaim a state of emergency" and make a series of prohibitions pursuant to that emergency, such as "prohibiting ... any person from being on the public streets."
 
 Washington's Democratic governor, Jay Inslee, appeared on the April 19 edition of ABC's "This Week"
 Orders still carry the force of law, experts say
 Experts told PolitiFact that despite the linguistic and procedural differences between orders and law, the stay-at-home orders effectively carry the force of law.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Calling it ‘the law of the state’ is fair," said I. Glenn Cohen, a Harvard Law School professor. "Statutes passed by legislatures are what most people think of when one says ‘laws,’ but from a lawyer’s point of view, a common-law decision by a judge, a regulation, or an action by the governor would all qualify broadly as ‘the law.’"
 James G. Hodge Jr., director of the Center for Public Health Law and Policy at Arizona State University, called it "entirely accurate" to consider an executive order to be a law. Laws can be derived from a constitution, a statute, a regulation, case law, "or orders implemented through legal means, including emergency powers invoked by governors."
 One thing many orders have in common with laws is enforcement power.
 Under Inslee’s order, certain violations can result in a misdemeanor. Several other states — including California, Hawaii, Michigan and Oregon — explicitly label violations as potential misdemeanors. New Jersey specifies that violators could be subject to disorderly-conduct charges, carrying imprisonment of up to six months or a fine. (The National Governors Association has a list of selected states’ enforcement powers here.)
 Just because law enforcement has arrest power in many of these states doesn’t mean they’ll be eager to use it.
 "Police can and do enforce stay-at-home orders, but arresting violators and jailing them would defeat the purpose of the order," said Nicole Huberfeld, a professor of health law, ethics and human rights at Boston University School of Public Health.
 Inslee’s spokesman, Mike Faulk, said his boss is not eager to use law-enforcement powers.
 "Do we want to bring charges against people? No, we never have," Faulk said. "That’s why we are focused on education and soliciting voluntary compliance before taking legal or regulatory action."
 What about the First Amendment?
 Gubernatorial stay-at-home orders do pose special concerns for First Amendment rights, particularly freedom of assembly. But fundamental rights can be trumped by public health concerns, experts said.
 In the 1905 case Jacobson v. Massachusetts, for example, the Supreme Court ruled 7-2 that a mandatory vaccination law was a legitimate exercise of state power to protect public health and safety.
 As for the First Amendment, there are several longstanding exceptions, including the famous "falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic" exception, which dates back to the unanimous 1917 decision in Schenck v. United States.
 "Time, place, and manner restrictions on speech, including protests, so long as they are not targeted to a particular message, are frequently upheld," Huberfeld said. In addition, she said, "government authority to protect public health, safety, and welfare tends to be read more expansively during an emergency. While silencing people totally would be questionable, during a pandemic that involves a highly contagious disease, the government may find it necessary to prevent public gatherings until such gatherings are deemed safe by health experts."
 Hodge agreed. "The government can shut down protests to the extent they involve physical gatherings of persons in violation of specific state-based emergency orders," he said. "Rights to speech and assembly do not constitutionally include endangering the health of others, especially in pandemic circumstances involving an easily spread, deadly condition like COVID-19."
 Our ruling
 Inslee said that stay-at-home orders "actually are the law of these states."
 Technically, many have been issued in the form of executive orders or proclamations, rather than a conventional law passed by the legislature and signed by the governor. However, a broad range of legal experts said that executive orders, proclamations and similar orders are equivalent to legislature-passed laws and can be enforced in essentially the same way, and in tandem with existing laws such as disorderly conduct.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
After a primary campaign extended by the coronavirus, MJ Hegar was selected by Democratic voters in Texas to challenge Republican U.S. Sen. John Cornyn in November.
 Hegar celebrated her primary election win with a virtual victory party hosted on Facebook, with appearances from state officials and members of the Texas Democratic Party.
 During the event, Hegar talked about the coronavirus and its impact in Texas, stating that "we had a health care crisis in this state before COVID-19."
 "Before the pandemic, nearly 1 in every 5 was without access to health care coverage," Hegar said. "And now: 1 in 3. Nearly 1 in 3 Texans under the age of 65 don’t have access to health care insurance because of the record unemployment and because of our health care model that is failing Texas."
 Texas consistently ranks as the state with the highest uninsured rates, but is Hegar right about the number of people without insurance coverage during the coronavirus pandemic?
 Pre-pandemic insurance levels
 Hegar’s campaign shared multiple news articles about Texans without health insurance published before and during the pandemic, including recent reporting from the Houston Chronicle highlighting how job losses are leading to a growing population of uninsured Texans.
 Let’s start with the rate of uninsured Texans before the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
 The Kaiser Health Foundation, a nonprofit health policy research organization, publishes state health facts using detailed data from the Census Bureau, including the insurance status of people under 65 in Texas.
 More than 4.8 million people under 65 are uninsured — about 19.9% of the population that age, or about 1 in 5 people, according to the latest Census Bureau data published in 2019.
 Of those Texans who are insured, about 66% are covered through their employer and 21.6% are covered by Medicaid.
 Texas is one of 13 states that has not expanded Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act, which allows people between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level (considered middle class) to receive tax credits to offset the cost of insurance plans purchased through an online marketplace.
 The act also grants free coverage under Medicaid to anyone earning less than 138% of the federal poverty level (which this year is $26,200 for a family of four) in states that have opted to expand the program.
 Since Texas has not expanded the program, eligibility requirements for the program are more strict and are not based solely on income. In order to qualify, a person must have an annual income below a certain threshold ($51,876 for a family of four) and be pregnant, be a parent or caretaker of children, have a disability or a family member with a disability or be 65 years or older.
 Pandemic insurance levels
 Since Texas first shut down segments of the economy to stop the spread of the coronavirus, the unemployment rate has fluctuated, spiking to a record 13.5% in April before falling to 8.6% in June.
 For comparison, in June of 2019 the unemployment rate in Texas was 3.4%.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As people lost their jobs, many also lost their health insurance coverage. The actual calculation of the number of people without coverage is a moving target, as people find new jobs or secure coverage elsewhere after becoming unemployed.
 But two national studies show that between 650,000 and 1.6 million Texans could have lost coverage since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
 In May, the Kaiser Health Foundation released a report estimating the number of people losing job-based health insurance coverage during the pandemic and how many of those individuals are eligible for coverage through Medicaid or through the Affordable Care Act’s marketplace tax credits.
 Nationally, the report estimates that as many as 26.8 million people will become uninsured, including workers, adult dependents and children. Of those, the report estimates that half are eligible for coverage through Medicaid and others through tax credits.
 In Texas, that report estimates that 1.6 million people will lose insurance coverage, which would bring the state’s uninsured rate to about 26.5% for people under 65 — or about 1 in 4 people without health insurance coverage.
 But these figures don’t speak exactly to Hegar’s claim, which is about the number of people who "don’t have access to insurance." 
 Even though Texas has opted not to expand Medicaid coverage to people with incomes below the poverty line, the report states that unemployment benefits and the temporary $600 weekly payments approved by Congress are likely to push annual income for many of these unemployed workers to levels that would make them eligible for Medicaid coverage in Texas.
 This means they will be able to access Medicaid coverage and marketplace tax credits for the remainder of the calendar year.
 Other people who lose coverage could switch to insurance offered through a spouse’s or parents’ employer and others may qualify for coverage but opt not to enroll, according to the report.
 So even though an estimated 1 in 4 Texans will now be without health insurance coverage, the actual number of people who are uninsured and "don’t have access to healthcare insurance" is likely even lower.
 A July report from Families USA, a research and advocacy non-profit that supports policies that make healthcare more accessible, offers a closer estimate. 
 The report tried to pin down the number of uninsured adults who would be unable to obtain new health insurance coverage after losing employment during the coronavirus pandemic.
 The report estimates that about 5.4 million people across the country became uninsured after losing their jobs between February and May of this year and could not find new coverage.
 In Texas, an estimated 659,000 adult workers lost insurance coverage after losing jobs and could not find coverage elsewhere, bringing the rate of uninsured adults in the state at the end of May to 29%, or about 1 in 3 adults, the report found.
 But these figures are just about workers, and don’t account for children and other dependents who may have been covered by another adult’s health insurance plan through an employer, which means the total number of people who are uninsured is likely higher than this estimate.
 Our ruling
 Hegar said 1 in 5 Texans did not have health insurance coverage before the pandemic, and now "nearly 1 in 3 Texans under the age of 65 don’t have access to health care insurance."
 Hegar is right about how many Texans under 65 were previously uninsured. The number of Texans without access to health insurance during the pandemic is harder to pin down, but her "nearly 1 in 3" remark reflects the latest available estimates.
 We rate this claim True.
Richmond Mayor LeVar Stoney recently said Virginia needs to dramatically expand covid-19 testing before it reopens its economy.
 "We’re not doing the kind of real-time, instantaneous testing that I think we need to do in communities throughout the Commonwealth of Virginia," Stoney, a Democrat, said during an April 10 interview on Newsradio WRVA. "We’ve lagged behind other states when it comes to testing."
 We fact checked whether Virginia really is trailing in coronavirus testing.
 Jim Nolan, Stoney’s communications director, said the mayor got his information from the Coronavirus Resource Center at Johns Hopkins University, a widely-cited website for covid-19 data. On every day in mid April, it shows Virginia ranked either 49th or 50th among states in covid-19 testing per capita.
 On April 21 - the date of this writing - Virginia was last. It had conducted 58,394 tests, or, on a per capita basis, 738 tests per 100,000 residents. The next lowest was California, at 747 tests per 100,000.
 Across the U.S., 1,168 tests had been conducted per 100,000. New York, hardest hit by covid-10, had tested a leading 3,851 per 100,000. 
 Here’s how Virginia compared to its neighbors, in number of tests per 100.000:
 
 
 West Virginia, 1,514;
 
 
 Tennessee, 1,479;
 
 
 Maryland, 1,142;
 
 
 Kentucky, 941;
 
 
 North Carolina, 794;
 
 
 Virginia, 738. 
 
 
 On April 10, when Stoney made his statement, Virginia was 49th in per capita testing, leading Kansas.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 While Virginia has been at the bottom in testing, other Johns Hopkins data shows it ranks in the middle in the spread of the disease. On April 21, there had been 110 infected Virginians per 100,000. That’s 21st per capita.
 The controversy
 Testing numbers have a huge role in debate in Virginia and across the country over when governors should ease their stay-at-home restrictions and allow widespread business reopenings.
 President Donald Trump has called for lifting restrictions and is urging supporters to "liberate" several states where Democratic governors issued the orders. That includes Virginia, where Gov. Ralph Northam's order lasts until June 10. Virginia has seen several recent protests demanding Northam open the state now.
 Northam, a pediatric neurologist, says he set the date cautiously, noting that some projections show the virus may not peak in Virginia until late May. He recently appointed a work group to ramp up Virginia’s testing. "The ability to run large numbers of tests is key to lifting restrictions on businesses and gathering," Northam said at an April 20 news conference.
 Northam’s explanation
 The governor and his advisors say they’ve had trouble competing with other states for scarce testing supplies. "We’re scouring the country for the equipment to help our institutions increase testing," Daniel Carey, Virginia’s Secretary of Health and Human Resources, said on April 17. "We just haven’t been successful because of the national shortage, but we realize we have to get significantly more testing…"
 Northam says Trump has given "limited guidance" on how states can work through the competition.
 Many governors have voiced similar complaints. The Northam administration also gives reasons that may be unique to Virginia.
 Commissioner of Health Norman Oliver says Virginia had a slow start because - unlike some other states - no Virginia hospitals or labs developed their own tests. That meant, for a while, Virginia had to rely almost solely on the state lab for testing. The state lab was so crunched, Oliver says, that it set guidelines that limited testing to the most vulnerable patients. As a result, he says, many Virginia physicians didn’t seek tests for patients showing mild covid-19 symptoms.
 Carey also says Virginia’s method of reporting tests may create a time lag that hurts Virginia when compared to other states.
 Northam says Virginia’s has improved as the state’s private labs, universities and hospitals have begun creating their own tests. During the first three weeks of April, the total number of tests conducted in Virginia has quadrupled. Many states have seen similar expansions.
 Northam told clinicians this week they should start testing anyone who’s symptomatic. And the state’s now testing all patients and workers in extended-care facilities.
 Our ruling
 On April 10, Stoney said Virginia has "lagged behind other states when it comes to (covid-19) testing." 
 On any given date from the eve of the mayor's statement through this April 21 writing, Virginia has been last, or next to last, in per capita testing. So we rate Stoney’s statement True.
Billionaire philanthropist and Microsoft founder Bill Gates is the target of yet another widespread Facebook post, this time for his support of efforts to create climate-friendly meat replacements.
 "Bill Gates worked to end livestock production, and is pushing lab grown meat," said a May 4 Facebook post.
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 In this case, the post is accurate in one way and misleading in another.
 Gates has invested in numerous companies working to make meat substitutes using plant-based ingredients and, in some cases, laboratory technology.
 But we found no evidence that Gates has worked to wipe out livestock production.
 The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation did not respond to a request for comment.
 Lab-grown meat
 News reports from the last several years indicate that Gates has at different times invested in start-ups focused on developing artificial or plant-based alternatives to meat, such as Nature’s Fynd, Hampton Creek, Memphis Meats, Beyond Meat and Impossible Foods. 
 Impossible Foods, for example, makes burger patties that use soy and potatoes for protein. The patties get their flavor from heme, an iron-rich molecule found in meat and plants that sparked some controversy but was approved for use by the Food and Drug Administration.
 According to the Washington Post, the company’s heme "is made by taking the DNA from the roots of soy plants, inserting it into genetically engineered yeast and then fermenting that yeast."
 Other companies are even more lab-oriented. Memphis Meats uses biotechnology to grow meat in what its website describes as a four-to-six-week process that involves "sourcing high-quality cells from animals" and "cultivat(ing) the cells into meat."
 "Gates has indeed invested in several non-animal alt-protein companies, including Memphis Meats, which grows real meat from animal cells," said Paul Shapiro, author of "Clean Meat: How Growing Meat Without Animals Will Revolutionize Dinner and the World."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In an October interview with Bloomberg News, Gates celebrated Impossible Foods and Beyond Meat for their plant-based meat substitutes. He said he had invested in both and that their products will contribute to a "dramatic reduction in methane emissions, animal cruelty, manure management and the pressure that meat consumption puts on land use."
 He’s made similar points on his personal blog, GatesNotes, writing in one post that a rising population requires more food and that farming livestock can take a toll on the environment and require increased deforestation to make room for the animals. 
 Livestock are responsible for 14.5% of greenhouse gas emissions each year, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
 "Raising meat takes a great deal of land and water and has a substantial environmental impact," Gates wrote in a 2013 blog post. "Put simply, there’s no way to produce enough meat for (a future population of) 9 billion people. Yet we can’t ask everyone to become vegetarians."
 "That’s why we need more options for producing meat without depleting our resources," he said.
 Ending livestock?
 We found no proof that Gates has worked to end livestock production completely.
 "He's never said his goal is to end livestock production, and he actually funds some projects to boost livestock-rearing in developing countries," Shapiro said. Shapiro cited the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s agricultural development efforts and a news article detailing $40 million the foundation put toward research and projects to breed cows that produce more milk.
 "If you care about the poor, you should care about agriculture, and if you care about agriculture, you care about livestock," Gates said in 2018, according to Reuters. "What that means in this context is helping poor farmers get as much as possible out of their animals."
 The foundation has also paid out a number of related grants, according to its website, such as a nearly $8 million grant to the International Livestock Research Institute in November to help "advocate for investment in livestock development globally," among other things.
 We searched Google and the Nexis database and found no credible reports showing Gates has worked to end livestock production or said he would like to do so.
 On the contrary, Gates wrote in his blog that if he were living in extreme poverty, he would raise chickens. In another post, he said that despite the implications on the climate, "We can’t simply get rid of soil — or stop growing crops, using fertilizer, and raising livestock."
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said "Bill Gates worked to end livestock production, and is pushing lab grown meat."
 Gates has invested at different times in several companies working to make meat replacements. Some of those companies are using biotechnology to grow their products in labs. But we found no evidence that he has tried to get rid of all livestock production.
 Based on the information available, we rate this post Half True.
Iowa, like many other states, faces a calendar-driven fact: the beginning of another school year. The state’s governor, Kim Reynolds, says schools should re-open for students who do not have health conditions that would put them at risk if exposed to the novel coronavirus. 
 "Kids are less likely to get it," Reynolds said at a July 14, 2020, news conference about children’s susceptibility to the virus, COVID-19. "They’re less likely to spread. So I think there’s some pretty good data out there that will help alleviate some of the concerns."
 PolitiFact has visited this topic previously, stating that children can catch the virus but that their symptoms aren’t as potent as those in older people. And, President Trump has called forcefully for schools to re-open for the next school year.
 Deciding to re-open schools that have been closed since mid-March in Iowa while the coronavirus pandemic continues has been a balancing act. Parents and teachers are dealing with the virus’s health threat on students, teachers and staff but also fear negative effects on children isolated at home instead of learning face-to-face with teachers and interacting with other children. The American Academy of Pediatrics, American Federation of Teachers, National Education Association and the School Superintendents Association are on record saying interaction is necessary but also caution against moving unsafely when reopening schools.
 While there’s no mistaking that a child ill with the virus would deal with discomfort, or in a worse scenario serious health risks, existing research backs up Reynold’s statement about the virus’ incidence rate and spread rate for children and research backing that up.
 In Iowa, 5% of people testing positive for COVID-19 as of July 15 were 17 or younger, state data showed on July 16, 2020. That’s lower than the national rate, which shows 10% of Americans testing positive for COVID-19 were age 17 or younger, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data showed July 16. Almost one-half of Iowa’s COVID-19 cases were detected in people ages 18 to 40. 
 Researchers concluding, to date, that young children are at less risk than older adults of catching or spreading the virus include:
 
 
 An international research team conducting studies in China, Italy, Japan, Singapore, Canada and South Korea. They concluded that the risk of transmitting the virus under the age of 20 could be as much as one-half the risk for those over the age of 20. They published their findings June 16, 2020, with Nature Medicine.
 
 
 Doctors and researchers at Mayo Clinic, of Rochester, Minnesota. "While all children are capable of getting the virus that causes COVID-19, they don't become sick as often as adults," the clinic’s COVID-19 section on its website states. "Children also rarely experience severe illness with COVID-19. Despite many large outbreaks around the world, very few children have died."
 
 
 Chinese researchers whose work was published in July 2020 in Pediatrics, the American Academy of Pediatrics journal.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 University of Vermont researchers writing in Pediatrics’ July 2020 issue, which also published American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines for returning to school classrooms. 
 
 
 A research team in Dresden, Germany. (more on that later)
 
 
 A World Health Organization-China joint report from February 2020.
 
 
 Skepticism has existed about the WHO-China report, especially when testing only was done in hospitals. Also, some researchers caution that infection and transmission rates among young people aren’t as high as they are for adults because the youths have not been exposed as much as adults to the virus. And that CDC data? It shows a higher percentage of people age 17 and younger who are tested for the virus showing up positive.
 Part of the reason for those CDC numbers is that fewer children than adults have been tested, and that what testing has been done has been with children suspected to be at risk. "Our data is skewed originally to people with symptoms, and then skewed to adults over 18," Dr. Deborah Birx, coronavirus response coordinator for the White House Coronavirus Task Force, said at a July 8, 2020, White House news briefing. More in-depth study of COVID-19’s affect on children is needed, she said. 
 Five days later, German researchers released a study of students in their country who were exposed to each other in school that, the researchers said, could indicate that COVID-19 might not spread as much among the youths as feared. 
 Pediatricians at Dresden University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus said they reached their conclusions after studying blood samples taken in May and June from 1,541 youths mostly in eighth through 11th grade. The samples were from 13 secondary schools and part of a 2,045-sample test that also included teachers, the researchers said.
 Our ruling 
 Reynolds said, "Kids are less likely to get it (COVID-19). You know, they’re less likely to spread. So I think there’s some pretty good data out there that will help alleviate some of the concerns."
 Reynolds’ assertion is supported by the bulk of the existing research, which shows that scientists have seen lower COVID-19 infection rates among young people and have not seen the virus spread among children at the rate as high as the ones for adults.
 However, researchers have only been able to study the virus since late January 2020, and they are learning more about it by the day. There may also be statistical quirks affecting the data, such as the limited extent to which children are being tested for the virus.
 Reynolds’ statement is largely supported by the research published so far, but with a big caveat that the science is preliminary and evolving. We rate the statement Mostly True.
For two decades, U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., has advocated for passing the Dream Act to grant legal status to certain immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children. As he made his case for the 2021 version of the bill, Durbin cited the role of these immigrants as workers in essential sectors.
 "In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, more than 200,000 DACA recipients are essential infrastructure workers," Durbin said during a Feb. 4 Senate floor speech, referring to the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which allowed these immigrants to stay in the country without fear of deportation.
 "That’s not my term — that is the definition of the Department of Homeland Security under President Donald Trump," Durbin said. "Among these essential workers are 41,700 DACA recipients in the healthcare industry: doctors, intensive care nurses, paramedics, respiratory therapists — all of them in a suspended immigration status because (the) Dream Act is still a bill, not a law."
 The number of DACA recipients who hold essential jobs during the pandemic has been a talking point for months among advocates of protecting these immigrants from deportation. A few think tanks — including one cited by Durbin — have tried to estimate their numbers, using varying criteria. Their estimates range from the tens of thousands to as many as 361,000.
 Dream Act and Obama administration efforts
 For two decades, Democrats and Republicans in Congress have crafted versions of legislation, sometimes called the Dream Act, that would offer a path to citizenship for immigrants who came here illegally as children. But despite bipartisan enthusiasm in Congress, the bills have stalled. 
 In 2012, the Obama administration created DACA as an administrative program to protect these immigrants from deportation, as long as they reapplied every two years and met certain requirements. The Trump administration tried to rescind the program, but encountered legal hurdles. On his first day in office, President Joe Biden issued a memorandum directing federal officials to preserve DACA. There were about 641,000 active DACA recipients as of September.
 Durbin and Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., introduced the Dream Act of 2021 to allow certain immigrants to earn lawful permanent residence and eventually citizenship if they meet conditions, including passing background checks, and pursue higher education, work lawfully for at least three years, or serve in the military.
 Where DACA recipients work
 Durbin’s spokesperson said his statistics about essential workers came from an April 2020 report about the demographics of DACA recipients by the Center for American Progress, a liberal public policy research and advocacy organization.
 CAP drew from a March 2020 memo by the DHS’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency identifying essential critical infrastructure workers during the pandemic. 
 The analysis by CAP included workers in health care, education and food-related jobs, although CISA’s list also included jobs in other areas such as transportation. CAP also drew on its own analysis of Census data to estimate how many people were DACA recipients, and looked at Bureau of Labor Statistics occupational classifications to come up with its employment numbers.
 "Across the country, 202,500 DACA recipients are working to protect the health and safety of Americans as the country confronts COVID-19," the report stated. "They are ensuring that children are still being educated; food is still being grown, packaged, cooked, shipped, and put on the shelves of grocery stores; patients are being cared for; and much more."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CAP found that 29,000 DACA recipients are frontline health care workers, while an additional 12,700 work in the healthcare industry as custodians, food preparers ormanagers, among other jobs. Durbin arrived at his figure of 41,700 by adding those two groups. 
 We sent the CAP report to the Center for Immigration Studies, a group that advocates for low levels of immigration. Steve Camarota, the group’s director of research, said that some of those CAP counted as health care workers are not on the frontlines of the pandemic, such as dental assistants or technologists or technicians for veterinarians or ophthalmologists.
 "Honorable work to be sure, but not vital to fighting COVID," Camarota said.
 CAP said its analysis includes 6,000 health technologists or technicians, including dietetic technicians, pharmacy technicians, psychiatric technicians, surgical technologists, veterinary technologists and technicians, and ophthalmic medical technicians.
 But CAP’s numbers aren’t out of line with other groups that have come up with estimates of DACA recipients who work in essential industries:
 
 
 The Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan think tank, concluded that there were between 72,000 and 361,000 essential workers among DACA participants in 2020. The range is based on various definitions of essential industries.
 
 
 The Center for Migration Studies, a nonpartisan think tank devoted to studying international migration, concluded there were about 43,500 DACA recipients in health care and social assistance industries and tens of thousands in other essential industries including transportation, warehousing, retail, manufacturing and waste management.
 
 
 The New American Economy, a bipartisan group of mayors and business leaders that seeks an overhaul of national immigration policy, found there were 62,600 DACA-eligible individuals in healthcare.
 
 
 Our ruling
 Durbin said "More than 200,000 DACA recipients are essential infrastructure workers" including "41,700 DACA recipients in the healthcare industry."
 Durbin was drawing from an April 2020 report from the liberal Center for American Progress. The statistics come with some caveats, including that they are estimates and include a broad swath of workers in healthcare, including some who aren’t on the front lines of treating COVID-19 patients. Even so, the numbers he cited are lower than some estimates by other groups.
 We rate this statement Mostly True.
Months into the coronavirus pandemic, much remains unknown about the virus’ origins, transmission and longevity.
 But the need for more testing is a point of near unanimous agreement among health officials, scientists and members of both political parties. It’s the pathway to better understanding how far the disease has spread, how common severe cases are and how best to address it.
 So is the president pushing to limit testing?
 A new attack ad from Priorities USA targeting Wisconsin and other battleground states makes that claim with a series of quotes from President Donald Trump. Over the mandatory ominous music, the ad plays four Trump quotes asserting testing is making America look bad, so we should slow it down.
 
 
 
 
 
 Ads in this style have been known to pull quotes out of context or rearrange them chronologically to create a more compelling narrative.
 That didn’t happen here.
 America has the most confirmed coronavirus cases in the world — with 2.3 million as of June 24, 2020 — and has also done the most testing in the world, in terms of raw numbers. Across the nation we are conducting about 500,000 tests per day now, double where we were in early May, according to covidtracking.com.
 That said, many countries have done more testing on a per-capita basis, as detailed by Johns Hopkins University. Throughout the pandemic the U.S. has averaged about 56 tests per day per 100,000 people. Germany, Canada, Spain and Australia have all tested at a higher rate, and Russia and Qatar are among a handful of countries that have topped 100 daily tests per 100,000 people.
 Trump has boasted of the volume of testing in the past, saying America’s testing is the best in the world and that the high number of confirmed cases is a "badge of honor."
 But since May, the president has also increasingly pushed back against testing, calling it "overrated" and noting the bad optics associated with the higher case counts. He took that line of reasoning a step farther in his latest comments, as detailed in the ad.
 Here are the four quotes in context.
 ‘By doing all of this testing we make ourselves look bad.’
 Trump said this May 6, 2020, during a meeting with Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds.
 The quote
 "The media likes to say we have the most cases, but we do, by far, the most testing. If we did very little testing, we wouldn’t have the most cases. So, in a way, by doing all of this testing, we make ourselves look bad."
 The context
 Reynolds — a Republican — responded to Trump by highlighting the importance of testing: "That really provides us the data we need to understand the virus activity better." Trump, meanwhile, has made numerous similar comments, including a June 19, 2020, Wall Street Journal interview where he called testing "overrated" and said "in many ways, it makes us look bad."
 ‘When you test you find something is wrong.’
 Trump said this May 14, 2020, during an appearance in Pennsylvania.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The quote
 "Don’t forget, we have more cases than anyone in the world, but why? Because we do more testing. When you test, you have a case. When you test, you find something is wrong with people. If we didn’t do any testing, we would have very few cases."
 The context
 Trump asserts there would be fewer cases if there were less testing. Of course, less testing would simply mean officials are aware of less cases, or there would be fewer identified cases — it wouldn’t mean fewer cases exist. 
 But this line of thinking is consistent with other comments from the president, including a May 15, 2020, event where Trump said, "If we didn't do any testing, we would have very few cases," and "Maybe it (testing) is overrated."
 "Testing is a double-edged sword. … So I said to my people, slow the testing down please."
 These statements, used separately in the ad, are both from a June 20, 2020, rally in Oklahoma.
 The quote
 "You know, testing is a double-edged sword. We’ve tested now 25 million people. It’s probably 20 million people more than anybody else. German’s done a lot. South Korea’s done a lot. They called me, they said the job you’re doing (trails off). Here’s the bad part. When you’re testing to that extent, you’re going to find more people, you’re going to find more cases. So I said to my people, ‘Slow the testing down, please.’"
 (Note: The U.S. has conducted more tests than any other country in terms of raw numbers, but the "20 million … more than anybody else" is wrong. Russia has conducted more than 17 million tests, according to tallies from Our World in Data)
 The context
 Various White House officials claimed Trump was speaking in "jest", was "obviously kidding" or was speaking "tongue in cheek" about slowing down testing. Trump himself has responded to this assertion multiple ways.
 On June 23, 2020, he was asked specifically if he was kidding about slowing down testing. He responded, "I don’t kid. Let me just tell you. Let me make it clear," then went on to talk about America having "the greatest testing program anywhere."
 But in an interview that day with FOX News, Trump responded to a question — "But you don’t mean, do you mean slow down testing?" — by backing away from the statement and reiterating the idea that the U.S. would look better if it tested less. 
 "No I don’t mean slow down, but if we did slow down … let’s say instead of 25 million tests we did 5 million tests, we’d be very low in cases right now, and everyone would say, ‘Isn’t that wonderful,’" Trump told "Fox & Friends."
 Dr. Anthony Fauci — part of the national coronavirus task force — said that day in testimony before Congress the federal government is trying to expand coronavirus testing, not slow it down. Fauci told the House Energy and Commerce Committee, "None of us have ever been told to slow down on testing."
 Our ruling
 An attack ad targeting various battleground states quotes Trump as saying testing makes the U.S. look bad, "so I said to my people slow the testing down."
 Video recordings show he did indeed say these lines, and in the order presented. And the overall impression created by the ad is consistent with Trump’s messaging over the preceding month and a half.
 As health officials and politicians alike have pushed for more testing, Trump has expressed increasing doubts as to its importance, progressing from calling it "overrated" to calling for the slow down. Though White House officials defended that as a joke, Trump at one point contradicted that, while at another saying he didn’t mean it.
 We rate this claim True.
In a heated exchange late last month on CNN’s State of the Union, host Jake Tapper pressed Adm. Brett Giroir, the Health and Human Services assistant secretary who oversees COVID testing efforts for the Trump administration, on why the government isn’t requiring commercial labs to increase testing capacity in order to speed turnaround time.
 Giroir’s response described a series of steps — some unusual — being taken by the federal government. One focus was on the role veterinary labs, including those with special certification, could play in helping to build capacity. "Five veterinary labs have their CLIA certification to officially test human patients," he said. "There are a lot of labs who are doing surveillance testing that don't need the CLIA certification."
 He was referring to certification under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, a federal law that sets the standard for labs that test human specimens.
 So that got us wondering: Can labs that test cattle, chickens or your pet Fido run tests on humans? And, if so, what role are they playing in the national pandemic, and how much is it helping?
 After all, the issue of expanding lab capacity will likely come up repeatedly as demand for testing increases with mounting case counts. Turnaround times at some labs have grown, with results now taking days to more than a week in some areas, frustrating consumers and public health officials. Delays for test results mean delays for contact tracing and quarantining. The administration’s pandemic response, including testing issues, is also proving to be a hot topic on the campaign trail.
 We reached out to HHS for more information about Giroir’s statement.
 An HHS spokesperson emailed a list of nine veterinary labs that have received the required certification to do patient-specific human testing, saying Giroir had been mistakenly briefed before the interview that there were only five. A U.S. Department of Agriculture spokesperson said there are 15 National Animal Health Laboratory Network facilities nationwide that have CLIA certification to test human samples. Clearly, there are vet labs in the U.S. with the necessary credentials, but the exact number is a matter of confusion.
 As for the surveillance efforts, the HHS spokesperson did not provide specific examples of veterinary labs doing such work but provided a Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services FAQ saying labs that don’t have CLIA certification can do some types of surveillance if results are not given to specific patients.
 Similar science, same machines
 Our experts all quickly noted that veterinary labs — especially those that focus on food animals, including cows, pigs and chickens, have long tested for diseases, including many kinds of coronaviruses.
 They’re on the lookout for microbes that can affect food safety, such as salmonella or E. coli, or diseases that can devastate the animals themselves, including avian influenza, hoof and mouth disease or African swine fever.
 Hence, a lot of testing goes on in the 63 food-animal testing labs in 33 states and four Canadian provinces accredited by the American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians, said its executive director, David Zeman.
 "In some states, we have more capacity in the vet labs than in the public health labs," he added.
 Those vet labs, often affiliated with universities or government agencies, use highly sophisticated equipment, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques, as do labs focusing on human testing. Many of the COVID tests being done are PCR, which can detect the virus’s genetic material.
 "It’s the same machines, the same science," said Zeman.
 However, these are large, full-service labs that deal mainly with farm animals, different from the smaller labs generally found at your neighborhood vet. So, sorry, Fido.
 A different regulatory chain of command
 Earlier this year, researchers at Iowa State University found that the testing process for the new coronavirus is similar to that used to test pigs for porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED) virus, a disease that killed thousands of piglets in 2013. Because a lot of labs had updated their equipment and processes so they could check for PED, they were in a good position to help with COVID-19 testing.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Except, of course, it’s never that simple.
 While the science and technology are the same, the administrative requirements are not.
 Veterinary labs must meet standards for accreditation by such groups as the American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians and are overseen by federal and state agricultural agencies.
 Human labs also must meet strict standards, including CLIA, and fall under the auspices of other agencies, including the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 One requirement is that the CLIA lab must have a director who is a medical doctor with specialized experience. Most animal labs are run by, not surprisingly, veterinarians, often ones with Ph.D.s. Some vet labs have formed partnerships with CLIA-certified labs to clear this hurdle. Still, it’s a process that can take weeks, so it’s not an overnight fix, said Zeman. 
 Running the numbers
 But can these labs really make a difference in the testing backlog?
 A June article on the American Veterinary Medicine Association website quoted an official in May saying that the then-seven CLIA-certified vet labs had the capacity to process 12,000 PCR samples with a 24-hour turnaround.
 Zeman said he sent out a survey in July to his 63 members in response to an HHS inquiry and found that, on average, each lab — if CLIA-certified — could process 500 to 1,000 COVID samples a day on top of what it needs to do to monitor animals.
 "Multiply that by 60 some labs and you have a rough idea of what they could do," he said. The math adds up to at least 31,500 tests a day.
 Currently, more than 700,000 samples are taken daily and sent to all types of labs — mainly large commercial and hospital-based facilities, according to tracking by Johns Hopkins University. The Atlantic’s COVID Tracking Project notes similar testing numbers at the end of July.
 More vet labs participating "could ease the burden on these labs, but it doesn’t sound like a game changer in terms of wait times," said Gigi Gronvall, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
 Some vet labs are working with public health labs to "test a specific segment of the population (university students, routine screening of government workers, etc.)," said Michelle Forman, media manager for the Association of Public Health Laboratories in an email. "So it’s not so much taking existing burden off of the public health labs and commercial labs but it is preventing additional burden from being put on them."
 Giroir said "lots" of labs that are non-CLIA certified labs are helping by doing research or surveillance, but Zeman was not aware of such efforts by such labs in his organization.
 Perhaps Giroir was talking about "pooled testing," in which a number of specimens are tested in a batch, speculated Mark Ackermann, director of the Oregon Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory in Corvallis, Oregon. Under that method, if any batch tests positive, individual specimens from the batch are then each tested to see who is positive. 
 Ackermann, whose lab has CLIA certification, pointed to another way vet labs might be helping: Many are making the liquid needed for the vials that hold the swabs taken from patients’ nasal passages.
 Our ruling
 Giroir was correct in saying there are some veterinary labs helping out with COVID testing.
 But even if all 63 accredited food-animal vet labs in the U.S. and Canada were pressed into processing human COVID tests, an industry survey estimates it would increase capacity by between 31,500 to 63,000 samples per day. While helpful, that would still be only a small portion of the more than 700,000 daily tests being conducted, which some experts say falls short of what is needed.
 Additionally, while vet labs are helping in some ways, Giroir provided little evidence to back up his assertion that "lots" of labs that lack CLIA certification are assisting in surveillance efforts.
 We rate this statement Mostly True.
Facebook users are sharing a post that credits Canada with responding to the novel coronavirus in ways the United States has not. But the post muddles some details of Canada’s response.
 "All schools in Canada are closed for the rest of the school year, each family will receive $950 every two weeks for the next 15 weeks, banks were notif(ied) to suspend mortgage payments for at least six months, and student loans deferred," the March 21 Facebook post says. 
 "Imagine if the United States did this," it says.
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 In reality, schools in Canada’s provinces have not yet been shut down through the year’s end. The Facebook post also mischaracterized the employment insurance measures that Canada implemented to provide income support for Canadians who miss work due to the coronavirus.
 Schools are closed, but not necessarily for the year
 Canada’s 10 provinces and three territories have mandated school closures "with varying dates, which in some cases coincide with the term break," according to UNESCO. 
 As of March 25, here’s what each of Canada’s provinces has decided for its schools:
 
 
 Alberta: Schools are closed "until further notice."
 
 
 British Columbia: Schools are closed indefinitely.
 
 
 Manitoba: Schools are closed until at least April 10.
 
 
 New Brunswick: Schools are closed until at least March 30.
 
 
 Newfoundland and Labrador: Schools are closed indefinitely.
 
 
 Nova Scotia: Schools are closed until at least April 6.
 
 
 Ontario: Schools are closed until at least April 6.
 
 
 Prince Edward Island: Schools are closed until at least April 6.
 
 
 Quebec: Schools are closed until at least May 1.
 
 
 Saskatchewan: Schools are closed indefinitely.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In sum, the Facebook post overstated the extent of Canada’s school closures, although the situation could change. All 10 provinces have shut down schools for some length of time, but as of March 25, no province had ordered schools closed for the rest of the school year.
 Economic support measures
 The Facebook post also mischaracterized Canada’s economic response to the coronavirus.
 On March 18, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced several actions, some of which were replaced in the final legislation, that the government would take to temper the economic burden faced by Canadians.
 Canadians should not have to worry about paying their rent or mortgage or buying groceries because of the #COVID19 crisis. Learn how the Government of Canada is taking action to support workers and their families: https://t.co/G3Z1Ean0Mx pic.twitter.com/aukpQcOmXf— CanadianPM (@CanadianPM) March 19, 2020 
 For starters, the government implemented "a six-month, interest-free, moratorium on Canada Student Loan payments for all individuals who are in the process of repaying these loans" and secured "a six-month payment deferral for mortgages," according to the press release.
 The government also pledged to introduce an emergency care benefit to provide pay for people who miss work due to the coronavirus and do not have access to paid sick leave. 
 The benefit would have provided "up to $900 bi-weekly for up to 15 weeks" to Canadian workers who are sick, quarantined, under instructions to self-isolate or taking care of a family member or child who is sick, quarantined, self-isolating or home from school due to closures.
 That’s not $950 — nor is it worth the same amount in American dollars — and it would not have gone to "each family" every two weeks, as the Facebook post wrongly claimed. 
 The emergency care benefit would have applied only to workers impacted by COVID-19, while an expansion of child benefits would have delivered more money to families with children.
 More importantly, the emergency care benefit and another proposed benefit for workers facing unemployment were eventually replaced by the "Emergency Response Benefit," which will give $2,000 a month for up to four months for workers who lose their income due to COVID-19.
 A spokesperson for the Canadian minister of finance’s office directed us to a press release detailing the new and more generous benefit, which was enacted into law on March 25.
 We’re doing everything we can to support you right now. Because at a time like this, you should be focused on what matters most - your health and the health of those you love. That’s exactly why we’re announcing the new Canada Emergency Response Benefit today. ⤵️— Justin Trudeau (@JustinTrudeau) March 25, 2020 
 The $2,000 per month is roughly the same as $950 every two weeks. But again, it will only apply to workers who lose income due to the coronavirus. It won’t apply to "each family."
 A government webpage detailing Canada’s efforts to support individuals outlines the emergency response benefit, the six-month moratorium placed on student loans and the flexibility provided to borrowers who need to defer up to six monthly mortgage payments.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said: "All schools in Canada are closed for the rest of the school year, each family will receive $950 every two weeks for the next 15 weeks, banks were notif(ied) to suspend mortgage payments for at least six months, and student loans deferred."
 The post is right about mortgage payments and student loans. But it overstates the impact of Canada’s new employment insurance benefits and exaggerates the extent of school closures.
 We rate this statement Half True.
During a recent press briefing regarding Covid-19 in New York state, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the economy must be reopened and that people need to get back to work. But, he said the rate of infection is currently being kept down because people are staying in their homes. 
 "And if you start acting differently, you will see a corresponding increase in that rate of infection. And the worst scenario would be if we did all of this, we got that number down, everybody went to extraordinary means, and then we go to reopen and we reopen too fast or we reopen and there’s unanticipated consequences, and we see that number go up again," he said. 
 He warned that people who think he is being "hyper-cautious" should look at what is happening in other countries and their responses to the new coronavirus. 
 "Go look at other countries that went through exactly this, started to reopen, and then they saw the infection rate go back up again," he said. 
 Since talk of reopening, and the possible dangers of doing so, dominates headlines across the United States and around the world, we wondered about whether other countries have already experienced a second surge in infections after relaxing lockdown orders for people, schools, businesses, and borders. 
 Experience elsewhere
 In Asia, authorities have been dealing with Covid-19 for more months than the United States has, and they have more experience in responding to the virus. 
 In some cases, the number of infections in a city or country has increased after welcoming inbound travelers, or after a relaxing of social distancing measures. 
 In Hong Kong, an early response seemed to contain the virus, and then life resumed as people returned to work and restaurants. 
 "With most everyone’s guard down, the predator lashed back last week. Cases of Covid-19 surged," STAT News reported on March 26. The government ordered people back home, and closed facilities that had been reopened. 
 In Hong Kong, it "soon became clear that while the majority were coming from overseas, quarantine measures in place were not sufficient, and local transmission had resumed," CNN reported on March 23. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In Hokkaido, Japan, an island prefecture, social distancing measures were relaxed, and then there was a sudden increase in new coronavirus cases, according to news reports. 
 "Hokkaido declared a three-week state of emergency in February that was lifted on March 19," NPR reported. "The prefecture had begun to reopen schools and was even allowing carefully orchestrated public gatherings. But the latest order reverses all that, asking residents once again to refrain from nonessential trips outside their homes and closing prefectural primary and secondary schools until May 6."
 Unlike in some other Asian countries, there was no evidence that the uptick in Hokkaido was because the virus was re-imported from outside Japan, the BBC reported. A lack of testing also contributed to health authorities’ inability to track and contain the virus, according to the BBC. 
 There is a surge in coronavirus cases in Singapore, which is concentrated in foreign worker dorms, where people live in close quarters. It's not clear whether the migrant workers arrived with the virus, or if it had been circulating among that population for some time, CNN reported. 
 Singapore has had to impose stricter measures to contain the virus. 
 We consulted with an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, on what is happening in Singapore, Hong Kong, and Hakkaido, Japan, and whether Cuomo’s statement is accurate. 
 "We are definitely seeing rises in cases in those places," said Stephen Kissler, Ph.D., a research fellow in the Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases. Kissler is a co-author of a paper that stated that "prolonged or intermittent social distancing may be necessary into 2022." He said he is hesitant to link the increase solely to lifting social distancing measures, because there are a lot of reasons cases could rise after a period of sustained low transmission. 
 "But on the whole I would say that the statement is correct," Kissler said. 
 Our ruling
 Cuomo didn’t say that all countries had increased infections after they reopened, and he also didn’t say explicitly that reopening caused the increase in the statement we fact-checked. He said that people who are anxious to reopen should be aware that there are cases where other countries reopened and then saw the infection rate increase. 
 There have been reports of increased infection rates in some countries that reopened. 
 We rate Cuomo’s claim True.
We may be months — at least — away from a vaccine to protect against COVID-19, but in the meantime the public is turning its eyes to drugs that could be used to treat it. 
 Among the first to be lauded as a possible solution was the antiviral drug remdesivir, which attacks the coronavirus to prevent it from making copies of itself and spreading. A clinical trial run in April found that patients who took the drug were more likely to recover from the disease — and do so faster — than patients who took a placebo pill. 
 But as excitement about remdesivir amps up, criticism has followed over the price that Gilead Sciences, the drug’s manufacturer, wants to charge for it. 
 U.S. insurers, including Medicare and Medicaid, will pay $3,120 for a five-day course of the drug, while other developed countries will pay about a third less because they’ll purchase from generic manufacturers to which Gilead has licensed production. 
 The move has angered many, including the progressive advocacy group and think tank Public Citizen, which tweeted on June 29, 2020 about the price declaration, writing, "Taxpayers spent $70,000,000 to develop this drug. It should be in the public domain. Instead, Big Pharma is robbing us blind."
 Parts of the tweet, course, are opinions. But the $70 million claim is stated as a fact.
 How much did taxpayers spend to develop remdesivir? 
 Let’s dig in. 
 Remdesivir’s ties to public funding 
 To back up the organization’s claim, Peter Maybarduk, Public Citizen’s Access to Medicine director, sent a May 7, 2020 post published on their site titled, "The real story of remdesivir." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Amid the worldwide Ebola outbreak in 2015, the U.S. government partnered with Gilead to identify a drug that targeted the Ebola virus and was successful in blocking the infection in Rhesus monkeys. 
 That drug would later come to be known as remdesivir. In 2017, a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services report noted that an entity within the Department of Defense would cost-share with Gilead for "continued development of this product," noting its antiviral activity against a number of viruses, including coronaviruses. 
 The Department of Defense has spent $34.5 million so far on this effort. 
 Also in 2017, the National Institutes of Health issued a $6 million grant to researchers at the University of North Carolina to speed the development of remdesivir. 
 And as the novel coronavirus made its way into the world, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, a division of NIH, announced it would funnel $30 million into the aforementioned clinical trial for remdesivir. 
 Since the Department of Defense and the National Institutes of Health are funded through federal taxes, these three payments add up to what Public Citizen claimed. 
 Our ruling 
 Public Citizen wrote that taxpayers paid $70 million to develop remdesivir. 
 Three separate projects from agencies that are funded by taxpayer dollars, adding up to $70 million, have commenced since 2015. 
 We rate the claim True.
Former White House advisor Steve Bannon has been defending President Donald Trump against criticism that he was slow responding to the coronavirus.
 Bannon recently lauded Trump's Jan. 31 order restricting travel with China, the original source of the virus. Bannon said the action came while a key medical adviser - Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases - was saying covid-19 was not a threat to the United States.
 "Fauci told us there’s nothing to worry about. That’s his quote, ‘There’s nothing to worry about,’" Bannon said during an April 14 radio interview on The John Fredericks Show, a conservative broadcast based in Portsmouth, Va.
 We fact-checked Bannon’s claim. Bannon, a Richmond, Va. native, cited two instances in late January when Fauci said the disease wasn’t a big threat to Americans. Each time, however, Fauci added that the situation could change.
 Newsmax interview
 On Jan. 21 - the day the first covid-19 case in the U.S. was confirmed - Fauci appeared on conservative Newsmax TV. "Bottom line, we don’t have to worry about this one, right?" asked Greg Kelly, the host.
 Fauci said, "Obviously, you need to take it seriously and do the kind of things the (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and the Department of Homeland Security is doing. But this is not a major threat to the people of the United States and this is not something that the citizens of the United States right now should be worried about."
 So Fauci, in a qualified response said, don't worry "right now;" "you need to take it seriously;" and although "this is not a major threat," keep an ear open to the CDC and Homeland Security. 
 Catsimatidis interview
 On Jan. 26, Fauci gave an interview to John Catsimatidis, a syndicated radio host in New York. "What can you tell the American people about what’s been going on?" Catsimatidis asked. "Should they be scared?"
 "I don’t think so," Fauci said. "The American people should not be worried or frightened by this. It’s a very, very low risk to the United States, but it’s something we, as public health officials, need to take very seriously."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fauci reiterated that the covid-19 "isn’t something the American people need to worry about or be frightened about" because, at the time, it was centered in China and the U.S. could screen travelers from that nation. 
 But Fauci also twice described the virus as "an evolving situation," and said, "Every day, we have to look at it very carefully." 
 Jurisprudence
 On April 13, PolitiFact National examined a tweet by Republican DeAnna Lorraine, a unsuccessful California congressional candidate. She said Fauci "was telling people on February 29th that there was nothing to worry about and (covid-19) posed no threat to the US public at large."
 Lorraine’s statement was ruled Mostly False. Although Fauci said that day he saw no immediate need for social distancing, PolitiFact noted that his comments were "filled with caveats that the situation could change." And contrary to Lorraine’s tweet, Fauci’s didn’t say then "there was nothing to worry about."
 Bannon’s remark is based on different Fauci statements from an earlier time with different words and different context.
 Our ruling
 Bannon said, "Fauci told us there’s nothing to worry about. That’s his quote, ‘There’s nothing to worry about.’"
 Fauci did say twice in late January, when there was one reported covid-19 case in the U.S., that American shouldn’t worry about the virus. But Bannon omits an important detail: Both times, Fauci added that the situation could change.
 So we rate Bannon’s statement Half True.
A recent comment from a public health official is driving unproven claims and conspiracy theories about how the coronavirus may be spreading.
 A June 9 Facebook post says the World Health Organization "now admits that asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 is very rare." 
 "The claims of asymptomatic transmission was (sic) a major justification for social distancing, the lockdowns, and masks," reads the image, which is a screenshot of a text post. "Everything about COVID-19 hysteria has been a lie."
 Other social media posts have used the WHO’s comments to spin more elaborate "I-told-you-so" conspiracy theories about the pandemic, including one that claims it was fabricated. Some claimed the comments show that masks and social distancing are "unnecessary without symptoms" and that they were somehow connected to protests after the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in Minneapolis police custody after a white officer kneeled on his neck.
 The posts were flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 
 (Screenshot from Facebook)
 Since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, public health officials have warned that infected people without any detectable symptoms can still spread the virus. That fact is one of the reasons that officials have advised healthy people to wear masks while in public. 
 So we wanted to check out claims about the WHO’s most recent comments on asymptomatic coronavirus patients.
 While an official with the WHO recently said asymptomatic spread of the coronavirus is "rare," the international public health organization has since walked back those comments — and several of the posts about the WHO’s communication about asymptomatic spread were published after the organization issued its clarification. There is no evidence that the WHO statement was connected to ongoing protests over police brutality, that it shows social distancing rules lack scientific backing, or that the pandemic itself was fabricated.
 WHO clarifies comments on coronavirus spread
 During a June 8 press briefing, Dr. Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO technical lead for COVID-19, said that asymptomatic spread is "very rare." The next day, she clarified her statement.
 Here are her initial comments from June 8, in context:
 "We have a number of reports from countries who are doing very detailed contact tracing. They’re following asymptomatic cases, they’re following contacts and they’re not finding secondary transmission onward — it’s very rare. Much of that is not published in the literature. From the papers that are published, there’s one that came out from Singapore looking at a long-term care facility. There are some household transmission studies where you follow individuals over time and you look at the proportion of those that transmit onwards.
 "We are constantly looking at this data and we’re trying to get more information from countries to truly answer this question. It still appears to be rare that an asymptomatic individual actually transmits onward. What we really want to be focused on is following the symptomatic cases. If we followed all of the symptomatic cases — because we know that this is a respiratory pathogen, it passes from an individual through infectious droplets. If we actually followed all of the symptomatic cases, isolated those cases, followed the contacts and quarantined those contacts, we could drastically reduce — I would love to be able to give a proportion — of how much transmission we would actually stop. But it would be a drastic reduction in transmission. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "If we could focus on that, I think we would do very, very well in terms of suppressing transmission. But from the data we have, it still seems to be rare that an asymptomatic person actually transmits onward to a secondary individual."
 Those comments appeared to suggest that the WHO was saying the coronavirus can’t really spread from asymptomatic people. News organizations published reports about Van Kerkhove’s statement, with CNBC publishing in a now-updated story that "coronavirus patients without symptoms aren’t driving the spread of the virus." 
 But on June 9, Van Kerkhove walked back her words in a question-and-answer session. Here’s what she said:
 "What I was referring to yesterday in the press conference were a very few studies, some two or three studies, that have been published that actually try to follow asymptomatic cases — so people who are infected — over time, and then look at their contacts and see how many additional people were infected. And that’s a very small subset of studies.
 "I was responding to a question at the press conference. I wasn’t stating a policy of WHO or anything like that. I was just trying to articulate what we know. And in that, I used the phrase ‘very rare.’ And I think that that’s a misunderstanding to state that asymptomatic transmission globally is very rare. What I was referring to was a subset of studies. I also referred to data that isn’t published."
 Van Kerkhove went on to say that some models have predicted that anywhere between 6% and 41% of the population could be asymptomatic COVID-19 patients. But she said she didn’t mention them during the June 8 press briefing because they are estimates, not research.
 In a June 10 interview on "Good Morning America," Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the WHO’s initial comment "was not correct."
 "There’s no evidence to indicate that’s the case. And in fact, the evidence that we have, given the percentage of people — which is about 25% to 45% — of the totality of infected people, likely are without symptoms," he said. "And we know from epidemiological studies they can transmit to someone who is uninfected even when they're without symptoms."
 The bottom line: Asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 does occur. But there’s too much scientific uncertainty to confidently say how big of a problem it is in context of overall spread.
 "We’re six months into a pandemic," Van Kerkhove said on June 9. "There’s a huge amount of research that’s being done, but we don’t have that full picture yet."
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post claimed the WHO "now admits that asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 is very rare."
 Van Kerkhove did say during a press briefing that it appeared to be "very rare" for an asymptomatic person to spread the novel coronavirus. But she walked back her comments the next day, saying it’s "a misunderstanding to state that asymptomatic transmission globally is very rare." Fauci said the WHO’s initial comment "was not correct." 
 The post paraphrases more or less what Van Kerkhove said, but since it was published after Van Kerkhove clarified her comments about asymptomatic spread of the coronavirus, the post leaves out important details or takes things out of context.
 We rate it Half True.
Gov. Roy Cooper says that, compared to other states, North Carolina has done an exceptional job of preventing job losses and COVID-19 deaths during the pandemic.
 His comments came during an Aug. 4 press conference after a state official offered an update on North Carolina’s rental assistance program.
 "Thanks to you and your team for the hard work," he said. "Several months ago, an analysis showed that in states across the country, North Carolina during this pandemic had among the lowest COVID-related deaths, as well as job losses per capita."
 "In a difficult year and amid too much pain, saving lives and jobs has been a point of pride for our state. It shows we follow the science to protect people’s lives without losing sight of their livelihoods."
 Cooper was referring to an analysis by the research firm Hamilton Place Strategies, according to spokesman Ford Porter.
 The study, published in April, examined statistics from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Labor to compare job losses and COVID-19 deaths in each state. 
 A chart accompanying the study shows North Carolina as one of only a few states where both death and job loss rates were well below the national average, though by the time Cooper spoke in August, those stats were a little outdated. 
 We wondered: How do North Carolina’s COVID-19 death and job loss numbers compare to other states as of August?
 It turns out that North Carolina’s numbers are still relatively low. 
 COVID deaths
 Data compiled by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control shows the number of deaths in each state, as well as the rate of death per 100,000 people.
 To see what the data looked like on the day of Cooper’s press conference, we used the "Wayback Machine" at Archive.org. 
 On Aug. 4, the CDC’s most recent data was from Aug. 3. Here’s what it showed.
 Death rate: North Carolina had a lower death rate than the national average, which was 184 deaths per 100,000 people on Aug. 3 and its rate of 130 deaths per 100,000 people ranked 12th-lowest in the country on that date. 
 Only Idaho (123), Colorado (120), Nebraska (117), New Hampshire (102), Washington (80), Utah (76), Oregon (67), Maine (66), Alaska (52), Vermont (40) and Hawaii (37) had lower rates as of Aug. 3.
 As of Aug. 19, North Carolina’s rate was 133 deaths per 100,000 people, still the 12th-lowest in the country.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 David Wohl, a physician who studies infectious diseases at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, says it makes sense to judge a state’s responsiveness by looking at deaths per capita. He said low rates are influenced by a multitude of factors, from access to care to the general health of the population.
 "NC does have a robust healthcare infrastructure with many local medical facilities and major regional tertiary care centers," Wohl told PolitiFact NC in an email. 
 "Testing for COVID-19 has been widely available, leading to potential earlier diagnosis. The state has been very active in administering monoclonal antibody treatment and I suspect we are doing better at this than many other states, possibly preventing progression to more serious disease."
 Job losses
 North Carolina’s unemployment rate is tracked by both the state’s commerce department and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 North Carolina’s unemployment rate was 3.6% in February 2020, hit a pandemic high of 12.9% in April 2020, and fell to 4.4% in July. In July, 20 states had lower unemployment rates than North Carolina.
 When Cooper spoke on Aug. 4, the latest unemployment data available was from June. At that time, 21 states had lower unemployment rates than North Carolina. 
 But unemployment rates, which are based on household surveys, don’t alone provide a clear picture of each state’s employment level, says Michael Ettlinger, founding director of the University of New Hampshire’s Carsey School of Public Policy. 
 "There are many otherwise employable people who want employment but who are not out actively looking for jobs because their industry hasn’t come back enough to make it worthwhile," Ettlinger said. "With variations among states in people starting to seek jobs, differences in the unemployment rate between states can be as much because of those variations as actual job creation."
 Ettlinger and Jordan Hensley, a policy analyst in his department, recently published a study that examined how many jobs each state lost and recovered during the pandemic.
 According to their study, North Carolina lost 2.7% of its jobs between February 2020 and June 2021, equal to about 124,000 positions. That percentage is tied for the 10th-lowest among the states, Ettlinger said. 
 Unemployment data released just hours before this fact check reinforce the idea that North Carolina’s economy is recovering faster than other states. The latest data show that North Carolina lost only 1% of its jobs between last February and this July, the sixth-lowest percentage in the country.
 A variety of factors might influence job gains, Ettlinger said. Weather, early COVID-19 rates, current COVID-19 rates, the type of businesses in each state, pre-existing employment trends, and "a certain degree of randomness" may all play a role in employment levels, he said.
 Mike Walden, an economist at N.C. State University, says the state may have benefitted from its mix of industries.
 "Sectors like technology, financial services, and education — particularly higher education — largely continued operating. Also, agriculture and agribusiness were deemed necessary and continued their work," Walden told PolitiFact NC in an email.
 
 Cooper appointed Walden to a business group that met with him virtually every two weeks. He said Cooper and others in state government "worked with and listened to the business community for advice on managing both the economic and health issues of the pandemic."
 Still, "if I was asked prior to the pandemic if NC would have performed so relatively well, I would not have necessarily predicted these very positive results," he said.
 Our ruling
 Cooper said "North Carolina during this pandemic had among the lowest COVID-related deaths, as well as job losses per capita."
 North Carolina was 12th from the bottom among states in the coronavirus death rate, and an analysis by the University of New Hampshire shows that North Carolina’s job losses during the pandemic were the 10th lowest among the states. These are not the absolute lowest rates nationally, but both measures can reasonably be described as being relatively low.
 We rate Cooper’s claim Mostly True.
During a CNN town hall, President Joe Biden emphasized the importance of getting vaccinated for the coronavirus.
 "We have a pandemic for those who haven’t gotten a vaccination. It’s that basic, that simple," Biden said during the July 21 town hall in Cincinnati, Ohio. "Ten thousand people have recently died; 9,950 of them, thereabouts, are people who hadn’t been vaccinated."
 That works out to 99.5% of recent COVID-19 deaths occurring among the unvaccinated population. 
 
 This statistic has been cited frequently by health officials, though its sourcing is a little opaque.
 When we asked the White House for a database or peer-reviewed paper to support the statistic, they did not provide one. Instead, they pointed us to comments made at the White House by Dr. Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 During a July 1 White House press briefing, Walensky said the country has made "incredible progress towards ending the pandemic" but added that it’s "clear that communities where people remain unvaccinated are communities that remain vulnerable. This is all true as we monitor the continued spread of the hyper-transmissible delta variant." 
 The delta variant is able to spread faster than previous strains of the novel coronavirus, and now accounts for more than four of every five new infections in the United States. 
 Specifically, Walensky said, "preliminary data from a collection of states over the last six months suggest 99.5% of deaths from COVID-19 in these states have occurred in unvaccinated people." 
 Walensky repeated that figure during congressional testimony on July 20, suggesting it was still the most recent CDC data available on this question. 
 During a hearing, Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., asked Walensky for data on the percentage of deaths involving people who were not vaccinated. She responded, "In a five-month study from January to May in numerous states, five to six states, it was 99.5%."
 Then, during the July 22 White House briefing, Surgeon General Vivek Murthy repeated the 99.5% figure.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalists at the Associated Press conducted an analysis of raw data from the CDC to answer the same question. The analysis, published on June 29, found that 150 of the more than 18,000 deaths in May were in fully vaccinated people. That’s about 0.8%, which is very close to the figure Walensky cited.
 The AP analysis also found that hospitalizations among fully vaccinated people accounted for fewer than 1,200 of more than 107,000 total hospitalizations for the coronavirus, or about 1.1%. Both data points suggested that increased vaccination rates would cut down the total number of hospitalizations and deaths. 
 The CDC did not respond to our inquiry for a database or other evidence in support of the 99.5% figure.
 That said, medical experts told us that they have a high degree of confidence in Walensky’s statements. 
 "This sounds true," said Dr. Monica Gandhi, a professor of medicine at the University of California-San Francisco. "The CDC is able to track deaths quite closely based on hospital records and coding."
 Dr. Babak Javid, another professor of medicine at UCSF, agreed. "I haven't seen any peer-reviewed, or even pre-print, data to support this statement, but I would be surprised if it was made up," he said. 
 Even from Walensky’s limited description, however, we do know that the data has limitations. Walensky said it is "preliminary," said it included only a half dozen or so states, and added that it runs through May, which makes it about six weeks old.
 Looking ahead, Javid said that the percentage of deaths occurring in the unvaccinated population may not stay at 99.5% or thereabouts indefinitely, just based on mathematics.
 "I expect pretty much everyone who isn't fully vaccinated to be infected by delta, or whatever variant supplants it around the corner, in the next year or two, but large numbers of the fully vaccinated will also be infected," he said. "These infections will skew milder, but in the elderly and vulnerable, that doesn't guarantee that 100% of cases won't be serious." 
 Our ruling
 Biden said, "Ten thousand people have recently died. 9,950 of them, thereabouts, are people who hadn’t been vaccinated."
 Biden is citing a figure that has been offered publicly on at least two occasions by the director of the CDC, Walensky. She cautioned that the data it is "preliminary," is based on only a half dozen or so states, and is now about six weeks old. The CDC has not made public any detailed data or methodology.
 That said, experts told PolitiFact that they don’t doubt the figure’s accuracy. The figure is also in line with a separate analysis by journalists at the Associated Press.
 The statement is accurate but needs additional context, so we rate the statement Mostly True.
The coronavirus pandemic has left millions without work in the United States.
 In Wisconsin, more than 2.6 million weekly unemployment claims were filed between March 15 and May 30, 2020. And though the number of weekly claims has gradually declined, more than 728,000 claims remained unpaid at the end of May. 
 The state Department of Workforce Development is working to hire additional workers to handle unemployment claims. But former Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican who lost to Democrat Tony Evers in 2018, has his own idea of how to tackle it.
 "Assign all state employees who have been idle at home to process unemployment benefits," Walker said in a June 5, 2020 tweet.
 Are there really state workers sitting "idle at home" during the crisis?
 The claim
 The June 5, 2020 tweet wasn’t the first time Walker, who is now president-elect of the conservative group Young America’s Foundation, made such a claim. 
 In a May 20, 2020 New York Times Op-Ed, he wrote "many state government employees are still receiving paychecks as they sit idle at home."
 When asked to back up the claim, a Walker spokesperson pointed to a March 23, 2020 memo to Wisconsin state employees from Department of Administration secretary Joel Brennan. 
 A provision of the memo says non-essential employees who are unable to do their jobs from home are eligible to use up to 80 hours of paid administrative leave. 
 Employees eligible for the administrative leave are available for alternative assignments, including to support "various activities around the state’s COVID‐19 response efforts," according to the memo.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The provision took effect March 25, 2020. Both non-essential employees and appointed employees are eligible for administrative leave, but those hired in response to the coronavirus pandemic are not. The memo says employees may use the money to cover normal work hours for those who are sick or deemed "unable to telework" by their supervisor. 
 The state of state workers
 Wisconsin Department of Administration spokesperson Molly Vidal called Walker’s statement a "gross oversimplification."
 Vidal said the policy allows employees who have not yet earned paid administrative leave benefits "to access leave if they contracted COVID-19, needed to care for a family member with COVID-19 or due to the sudden closure of childcare facilities." 
 She emphasized that employees are required to use up all other leave options — such as paid vacation time — before being able to use this administrative leave.
 Vidal added that 8 percent of eligible state employees are using the program -- or, about 2 percent of all state employees. These employees, she noted, are often custodians, facility repair workers and tour guides. 
 Beyond that, hundreds of state employees have been temporarily reassigned to assist with the state’s coronavirus response, according to Vidal. Some of the tasks include transporting testing supplies and becoming coronavirus contact tracers. 
 Our ruling
 Walker claimed there are state employees being paid to sit "idle" at home.
 Although there are state employees who are being compensated while unable to work due to coronavirus, there are stipulations that need to be met before a non-essential worker can qualify for paid administrative leave. What’s more, some people in nonessential jobs and unable to work from home have been put on to other COVD-related tasks.
 Our definition of Half True is "the statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context."
 That fits here.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis plans to form a task force to look at reopening schools and businesses including gyms.
 DeSantis said he understands why there were recommendations to close gyms due to the spread of germs. But he expressed concern that people may not be getting enough physical activity amid the shutdowns.
 "The No. 1 group of people who have been susceptible to COVID-19 if you look in New York and some of these other (places), obesity is, like, the No. 1 factor in whether you really get hit hard by COVID-19," he said at his April 14 press briefing.
 Overwhelming research shows age as the leading risk factor in the severity of the disease, however early research also shows that obesity is a risk factor in hospitalizations for COVID-19. 
 That’s a cause for concern in the United States, where 40% of the population is obese. Scientists have called attention to the research about obesity and COVID-19 because it’s another sign that age is not the only factor.
 Studies show obesity is a risk factor in COVID-19 cases
 We found a few studies that examine the role of obesity in COVID-19. These studies come with limitations, including that they were usually limited to a certain geographic region and may not include complete information on patients, such as outcomes after the study period. But they do provide a useful look at what we know so far about obesity and COVID-19. The studies we saw from New York were not yet peer-reviewed.
 Researchers at NYU Langone Health in New York City conducted two studies about obesity and COVID-19, among the largest examinations of COVID-19 patients to date. Most of the patients in the two studies overlap. The studies appear in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases and on the pre-publication website medRxiv. 
 One study, led by Dr. Christopher Petrilli, examined the factors associated with hospitalization and critical illness among 4,103 patients with COVID-19 for about one month. Nearly half of the patients were hospitalized. The study found that the strongest hospitalization risks were age over 75, obesity and history of heart failure, in that order.
 "Age is the most important demographic factor for severity of disease and more important than any single disease, but obesity is among the most important diseases in terms of risk," Dr. Leora Horwitz, one of the authors, told PolitiFact.
 Researchers defined obese as a body-mass index of greater than 30. BMI is a measure of body fat based on a person’s height and weight. Normal weight is a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9.
 Among the 1,999 hospitalized patients, 33% had a BMI of 30-40 while about 7% had a BMI of more than 40. The rates were similar among those who faced critical illness — as defined by intensive care, mechanical ventilation, hospice and/or death.
 "The chronic condition with the strongest association with critical illness was obesity, with a substantially higher odds ratio than any cardiovascular or pulmonary disease," researchers wrote.
 Obesity tends to increase risk for other conditions such as diabetes and heart disease, which are also risk factors for severe disease with COVID-19. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Separately, it does seem that the severe cases of COVID-19 have a strong component of inflammation — the body reacting (or overreacting) to the infection to cause severe irritation to the lungs," Horwitz told PolitiFact. "It turns out that obesity itself actually increases the amount of inflammation in the body. So it's possible that obesity also directly contributes to worse outcomes in that way."
 The other study by NYU Langone examined BMI stratified by age in COVID-19-positive symptomatic patients at the hospital. Researchers found that COVID-19 infected patients under age 60 with a BMI of 30-34 were twice as likely to be admitted to acute or critical care as those at same age with BMIs less than 30. Those who were morbidly obese, defined as having a BMI greater than 35, were three times as likely be admitted to the ICU. 
 "Though patients aged <60 years are generally considered a lower risk group of COVID-19 disease severity, based on data from our institution, obesity appears to be a previously unrecognized risk factor for hospital admission and need for critical care," researchers wrote. 
 In the study, 37% of patients who came to the emergency department had BMI greater than 30. In New York City overall, 22% have a BMI greater than 30, so more people are showing up in the emergency department who are obese, author Dr. Jennifer Lighter told PolitiFact.
 A spokeswoman for DeSantis cited a news article in USA Today about a study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention which examined characteristics of hospitalized COVID-19 patients in 14 states in March.
 The CDC found that among 178 adult patients with data on underlying conditions as of March 30, the vast majority had one or more underlying conditions. The most common underlying conditions in order were hypertension closely followed by obesity. (The other conditions that followed were chronic lung disease, diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease.)
 A DeSantis spokeswoman also pointed to an article by Reuters about New Orleans’ death rate from COVID-19. Reuters reported that obesity was seen in 25% of the COVID-19 deaths in Louisiana, according to the state health department. 
 A paper about obesity in COVID-19 cases at a hospital in Shenzhen, China found that patients with obesity are at increased risk of complications from viral respiratory infections however, the association with severity of COVID- 19 was unclear. Researchers found that obesity, especially in men, significantly increases the risk of developing severe pneumonia in COVID-19 patients. 
 The study examined 383 patients admitted in January and February.
 We sent the NYU research findings to a few doctors who were not involved in the studies to ask if research so far shows obesity is the No. 1 factor in COVID-19 critical cases or hospitalization cases. 
 "Not exactly," said Dr. Angela Fitch, associate director MassGeneral Weight Center. "This data shows that in people less than 60 years old, having the disease of obesity increased the need for admission to the hospital and admission to the ICU. Age is still the No. 1 factor so far but in those patients who are younger, obesity is a risk factor for more severe disease."
 The early data across many countries show a link between severity of disease and obesity, said Fitch, vice president of the Obesity Medicine Association. However, further research is needed nationwide and across the world, she said. 
 Our ruling
 DeSantis said "obesity is, like, the No. 1 factor in whether you really get hit hard by COVID-19."
 DeSantis didn’t explain what he meant by "hit hard," so we looked at research about COVID-19 patients who were hospitalized. We did not find any study that showed that obesity is the No. 1 risk factor. Most research and evidence so far shows age as the top factor. But early research suggests that obesity is also a key risk factor. 
 We rate this statement Half True.
Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee, argues that President Donald Trump failed to protect the country from the coronavirus when he had the chance. In an interview on MSNBC, Biden said Trump "absolutely missed any opportunity to get ahead of this." 
 Biden underscored the loss of American staff at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention office in Beijing.
 "We had over 44, if I’m not mistaken, people from the CDC in China, in China to observe what was going on," Biden said May 14. "The president brought home the vast majority of them, I think left only four in place."
 This is an intriguing claim. Biden is off on the exact numbers. But his point about stripped-down oversight is supported. According to the CDC, the program in China specifically charged with spotting new infectious diseases went from having four American staff in 2017 to none by 2019.
 It’s impossible to say with 100% certainty that if those Americans had been there, they would have been able to alert Washington earlier to an emerging threat. But not having them there eliminated that possibility.
 CDC China staffing
 Biden indicated he was a bit unsure of the exact numbers, and what he offered was an inconsistent blend of American and Chinese staff figures. He said there were 44 people "from the CDC in China." The actual number was 47 in March 2019 and that included eight Americans and 39 Chinese.
 When he said the number fell to four, the actual number by December 2019 was three Americans, and 11 Chinese.
 Biden spokesman Michael Gwin said the reduction mattered regardless.
 "Donald Trump dramatically reduced America's CDC footprint in China, removing vital positions that would have provided the U.S. with a critical early warning as the virus spread," Gwin said.
 Biden leveled this charge before in a slightly different way. In March, he said the U.S. had one person in-country and Trump "pulled him out." At the time, the details were murky. An American epidemiologist had left, but some Americans remained.
 The CDC has now shared more specific information with PolitiFact that breaks down the staffing for each of the offices and programs in its China bureau. 
 The new details show that the single greatest staff decline was in the HIV/AIDS program, the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. It went from one American and 10 Chinese employees to none.
 But the Global Health Protection program saw the largest reduction in U.S. staff. That program went from four Americans and 10 Chinese staff down to no Americans and five Chinese.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The CDC website touts that program as training "new disease detectives, who are critical to countries’ abilities to quickly find and stop disease outbreaks." The program emerged out of the Ebola crisis and sent American specialists around the world to work with infectious disease experts and build capacity in over 50 countries.
 That mission directly applied to the outbreak of what became known as COVID-19. And at the time of the outbreak, the United States had no American staffer in the CDC office in Beijing.
 There is no way to say for sure that if more Americans had been in the CDC office, Washington would have had critical information sooner than it did. Former CDC chief Tom Frieden, now CEO of Resolve to Save Lives, an epidemic response training organization, told PolitiFact it might have.
 On the other hand, the timeline for the emergence of the new coronavirus was very compressed. It wasn’t until Dec. 30 that a doctor in Wuhan first flagged that he was seeing patients with a new respiratory disease. The doctor later documented how local officials quickly accused him of spreading rumors.
 By Jan. 10, he was infected and had to go to the hospital, where he later died. By Jan. 14, the World Health Organization was discussing the possibility of human-to-human transmission. On Jan. 20, the Chinese government declared that the outbreak was an emergency.
 Trump’s role
 Biden said Trump "brought home" the CDC specialists. They did leave on Trump’s watch, but it’s worth noting the budget factors that directly hit the Global Health Protection program.
 The effort emerged from the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Congress gave the CDC about $600 million to boost capacity worldwide to spot and contain new infectious diseases. That money ran out in 2019.
 The head of the CDC’s Center for Global Health told staff in January 2018 that the program would be reduced to 10 countries. China was not on the list. That more targeted approach was part of the White House’s 2019 global health strategy.
 The White House’s FY 2020 plan did not replenish the Ebola money that ran out in 2019. The total global health security budget, which included a range of activities beyond the sort of work in China, went from $504 million in 2019 to a White House request for $482 million in 2020. We reached out to the White House and got no comment.
 A group representing about 200 global health organizations appealed to Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar in January 2018 for money to keep the program going.
 "The ongoing danger that biological threats pose to American health, economic, and national security interests demands dedicated and steady funding for global health security," the group wrote.
 Our ruling
 Biden said that Trump "brought home" the vast majority of CDC staff in China, taking manpower from 44 down to four. He garbled the numbers. The actual staffing went from eight Americans and 39 Chinese (47), to three Americans and 11 Chinese (14).
 But within that, the American staff working specifically on new threats like COVID-19 went from four to zero.
 It is unclear whether the presence of those Americans would have provided an early warning. But the former head of the CDC said it was possible, and many global health groups lobbied for the overall program to continue. The White House decided not to ask for funds to maintain that program in China.
 Biden was off on his numbers, but the specific staffing details we later found add weight to the thrust of his argument. We rate this claim Half True.
In a press conference on May 5 in which Gov. Greg Abbott updated his reopening plan to add businesses such as hair salons and gyms, he recommended that at-risk populations "remain at home if at all possible" and avoid in-person gatherings, such as a church service, funeral or wedding.
 "We strongly encourage at-risk populations to try to watch or participate remotely, remembering this very important point, and that is almost 75 percent of the deaths from COVID-19 in the state of Texas are a result of people contracting COVID-19 who are age 65 and older," Abbott said.
 Texas was among the first states to start reopening businesses and lifting restrictions put in place to curb the spread of the coronavirus, allowing retail stores and restaurants to open May 1 at 25 percent capacity. 
 Abbott announced the latest set of reopenings Monday, expanding restaurant capacity to 50 percent and granting bars the ability to open at 25 percent capacity within the next couple weeks.
 This comes as the state continues to see its number of infections and deaths rise and clusters form mostly in rural parts of the state where meatpacking plants are located. Hospitalizations, however, have decreased since mid-April.
 With that in mind, we had to ask: Is Abbott right that almost 75% of coronavirus deaths in Texas are people older than 65?
 
 Looking at the numbers
 Abbott’s spokesman John Wittman said Abbott’s claim is based on figures from the Texas Department of Health Services, which publishes daily numbers on the state’s COVID-19 testing and cases.
 The data includes a breakdown of coronavirus deaths by age, race and gender, but only for those cases where the deaths have been investigated by the local and regional health departments. As of Wednesday, the majority, or 489, were still under investigation.
 "The demographic data on cases and fatalities come from the case investigation forms submitted by local health departments and our regional offices," said DSHS spokesman Chris Van Deusen.
 The purpose of the investigation is to confirm that the person had COVID-19 but also to collect other details about them and the circumstances around their death, Van Deusen said.
 Wittman said the data showed that 75% of investigated deaths were people 65 and older when Abbott made this statement.
 "It alternates almost daily, but it’s generally around that range," Wittman said. 
 As of May 6, the day after the press conference, the death toll in Texas was 948. Fewer than half, or 433, had been investigated.
 Of those, about 71 percent were Texans 65 and older. It was still about 71 percent, or 345 out of 489 investigated cases, as of Wednesday. The age groups broke down like so:
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ages 10 to 19 years old: 2 deaths, or 0.4%
 
 
 Ages 20-29: 10 deaths, or 2.04 %
 
 
 Ages 30-39: 9 deaths, or 1.8%
 
 
 Ages 40-49: 21 deaths, or 4.29%
 
 
 Ages 50-59: 54 deaths, or 11.04%
 
 
 Ages 60-64: 45 deaths, or 9.2%
 
 
 Ages 65-69: 59 deaths, or 12.06%
 
 
 Ages 70-74: 45 deaths, or 9.2%
 
 
 Ages 75-79: 45 deaths, or 9.2%
 
 
 Ages 80+: 196 deaths, or 40.08%
 
 
 Across the United States, about 79% of coronavirus deaths have been people 65 years and older, according to the National Center for Health Statistics data submitted between the beginning of February to the beginning of May.
 Like Texas’ statistics, the national numbers are also incomplete. The number of deaths represent only those entered between those dates and only include people with confirmed or presumed COVID-19.
 "While 80% of deaths are electronically processed and coded by NCHS within minutes, most deaths from COVID-19 must be coded by a person, which takes an average of 7 days," the NCHS states on its website.
 The data is also always somewhat behind because of the lag time between when a death occurred and when a death certificate is completed, submitted to NCHS and processed for reporting purposes. The delay can last anywhere from one week to eight or more.
 Our ruling
 Abbott said almost "75 percent of the deaths from COVID-19 in the state of Texas are a result of people contracting COVID-19 who are age 65 and older."
 Of confirmed coronavirus deaths, close to 75% were people within the age group Abbott provided, but he failed to include the caveat that this statistic leaves out more than half of the total deaths that have not yet been investigated. 
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
To prevent the spread of coronavirus, one state lawmaker wants to take the "assembly" out of the North Carolina General Assembly.
 North Carolina state Rep. Kelly Alexander, a Democrat from Mecklenburg County, suggested on Twitter that legislators should consider video conferencing. The start of the legislature’s session is scheduled for April 28.
 Alexander posted his tweet on March 11. That same day the World Health Organization labeled the spread of the novel coronavirus as a "pandemic," prompting a wave of event cancellations and changes across the globe.
 "With a vaccine a year in the future the General Assembly should use more teleconferences and fewer in person meetings to cut down on potential exposure...after all most of the GA’s members are in the high risk age group," Alexander tweeted, adding: "besides we need to modernize...just saying."
 
 Is it true that "most" of North Carolina’s legislators are in the "high risk age group?"
 Alexander never responded to an email from PolitiFact, so we don’t know how he came to his conclusion.
 Regardless, his tweet is on-point.
 At-risk ages
 First, let’s first look at what health experts say about the novel coronavirus (also known as COVID-19) and who’s most at-risk. 
 The virus causes a fever, cough and shortness of breath in people anywhere from two to 14 days after exposure, according to the the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC says people with chronic medical conditions such as heart disease, diabetes or lung disease are most at-risk.
 As for age, there’s no specific birth date at which people become more vulnerable. Generally speaking: the older you are, the more likely you are to have complications from the novel coronavirus.
 That said, top health organizations have defined "older adults" as people who are at least 60 years old.
 The CDC has previously, in a document unrelated to the coronavirus, defined older adults as those over 60. The World Health Organization specifically mentioned people over 60 in its recent report on the coronavirus outbreak in China. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health experts recently told CNN that the term "older" typically refers to anyone over 60. And US Surgeon General Jerome Adams said 60 is the "average age of people who need medical attention."
 It also appears that people older than 60 are more susceptible to complications from the virus.
 Scientific American reported that patients in China were more at-risk of death if they developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, known as ARDS, after contracting coronavirus. The average age of those who contracted the syndrome was 61.
 State lawmakers
 So we know that people who are 60-years-old or older are likely to be more at-risk than other age groups. With this in mind, let’s look at the age of North Carolina’s legislators. 
 The legislature includes 170 members: 120 in the House and 50 in the Senate.
 In the Senate, 28 members are 60-years-old or older. In the House, 63 members are older than 60.
 That means 91 members are aged 60 or older -- which is 53% of the General Assembly.
 Those numbers come from James White, the House principal clerk, and Sarah Holland, the Senate’s principal clerk.
 So it’s true that a majority of legislators are 60 or older. 
 How does that compare to Congress?
 In the U.S. House, 197 of its 435 members are 60 or older. In the U.S. Senate, 66 of its 100 members are 60 or older. That means about 49% of Congress is at least 60 years-old.
 Those numbers come from a report by the Congressional Research Service and Jennifer Manning, the service’s senior research librarian.
 Our ruling
 Rep. Alexander said "most" North Carolina legislators are in the "highest risk age group" for coronavirus.
 The highest risk age group is generally people who are aged 60 and older. Alexander’s claim is on-point: more than half of legislators are older than that. We rate his claim True.
With North Carolina in the middle of a stay-at-home order, the state’s top health official tried to emphasize the severity of COVID-19.
 The novel coronavirus has killed more than 200 people in North Carolina and reached 93 of North Carolina’s 100 counties, according to the NC Department of Health and Human Services.
 On top of that, health secretary Mandy Cohen on April 20 said the virus has reached a new status among other illnesses in America.
 "Covid-19 is now the leading cause of death in the United States," Cohen said.
 Is that true?
 If you look at average daily deaths, yes. If you look at the bigger picture, no.
 Recent deaths
 If you look for the answer to this question online, you’ll likely get mixed results.
 Several media outlets -- such as Live Science, Newsweek and others -- recently reported that coronavirus is the top cause of death in America. But those claims look at death rates in a very small window, while the U.S. Centers for Disease Control tend to label diseases based on their toll in a given year. 
 Live Science and Newsweek based their claims on a chart created by Dr. Maria Danilychev, who practices at Scripps Health in San Diego. Her chart takes the number of COVID-19 deaths in America as reported by Worldometer.com. Then it compares the deaths to the average daily deaths from other illnesses as reported by the CDC.
 For instance, if you look at the number of total deaths caused by heart disease reported in 2018 (647,457) and divide that by 365 (the number of days in a year) you get about 1,774 deaths per day. On April 20, Worldometer reported 1,939 coronavirus deaths across the U.S.
 Cohen’s office told PolitiFact that she also based her claim on how daily coronavirus deaths compare to past heart disease death averages. In an email to PolitiFact, DHHS spokeswoman Tracy Zimmerman cited the 30-day rolling average for COVID-19 deaths as documented on OurWorldInData.com.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Over the phone, Zimmerman added that Cohen didn’t mean for her comment to be taken as a broad statement about historical death trends.
 Deaths by year
 At the CDC, experts tend to look at a bigger picture when classifying something as a top cause of death.
 In fact, a spokesman for the National Center for Health Statistics has pushed back at the idea that COVID-19 is the leading cause of death.
 "There are no data to support that theory," Jeff Lancashire, a spokesperson for the National Center for Health Statistics, said in an email to CNN on April 10.
 "We have limited data on 2020 deaths by cause, and no final official numbers yet for 2019, but we do know by looking at the final death totals in 2018 for the two leading causes of death in the U.S., Heart Disease and Cancer, there is no way that at this point COVID-19 comes anywhere close to those totals," Lancashire said.
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution and The State newspaper in Columbia, S.C. have used Lancashire’s comments to add context to claims about coronavirus.
 PolitiFact emailed the CDC on Tuesday to ask if its opinion had changed. "Not really," CDC spokesman Brian Tsai said in an email.
 "One can argue that for some weeks, it is the leading cause for those particular weeks, but we typically talk about leading causes in terms of annual deaths," the spokesman said. 
 "When looking at the data year-to-date (i.e., January-April), COVID-19 wouldn’t be the leading cause. In a typical year, there are more than 200,000 heart disease deaths from January-April. For cancer, the number is a little less than 200,000 for that period.
 By contrast, when Cohen made her claim on April 20, the CDC reported coronavirus deaths at 39,000.
 Our ruling
 Cohen said "Covid-19 is now the leading cause of death in the United States." 
 That’s true only if you compare the number of people dying of coronavirus daily against estimates of other causes from previous years. The CDC has advised against using those daily numbers to make sweeping claims about the biggest causes of death in America.
 Cohen’s claim is partially accurate but leaves out important details that would give a different impression about the broader situation of health risks in America. We rate it Half True.
When North Carolina legislators returned to the Capitol, the House minority leader showed up wearing a surgical mask bearing the state flag.
 Health experts recommend that Americans wear face masks while in public to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus, which can be transmitted through aerosol droplets.
 So Darren Jackson, the Democratic leader in the GOP-controlled state House, has urged his colleagues to do the same. And on May 27, Jackson offered some advice for President Donald Trump.
 "Two thirds of Americans disapprove of Donald Trump not wearing a face mask in public, and the vast majority supports elected officials being required to wear masks in government buildings," Jackson tweeted.
 
 Is he right about the polling on Trump?
 Overall, yes: Polls show that most poll respondents believe the president should wear a mask, though the level of support varies by political affiliation.
 What polls show
 When we reached out to Jackson, he cited an online survey of 1,012 people by Navigator Research, a pollster that works with Democratic and progressive clients.
 Their poll question asked, "Do you approve or disapprove of Donald Trump’s decision NOT to wear a face mask while in public?" 
 Of the group, 27% said they approve, and 65% said they disapprove.
 This poll was conducted using an opt-in system, with respondents volunteering to participate. However, the data was weighted for "a variety of demographic variables" to approximate the national registered voter population, the firm said.
 A look at other polls using a variety of survey methods found similar results when asking whether Trump should wear a mask in public.
 The Navigator poll stands out because it asked people whether they approved of Trump’s decision, while other polls asked about masks without mentioning his behavior. Still, the results were comparable.
 Here's what they found:
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quinnipiac poll between May 14-18: 67% support
 
 
 Huffington Post and YouGov poll over May 14-16: 63% support
 
 
 Politico and Morning Consult poll between May 8-10: 70% support
 
 
 Kaiser Family Foundation poll conducted May 13-18: 72% support
 
 
 The Quinnipiac and Kaiser polls used phone calls, while the HuffPost/YouGov and Politico/Morning Consult polls were online.
 Partisan differences
 The most obvious divergence of views comes from partisan identification.
 While these surveys consistently show overall support for Trump wearing a mask, Republicans are far less enthusiastic. Here’s the amount of support for the idea from Republicans in each poll:
 
 
 Quinnipiac: 38% support
 
 
 HuffPost/YouGov: 46% support (with 44% among "Trump voters")
 
 
 Politico/Morning Consult: 58% support
 
 
 Kaiser Family Foundation: 48% support
 
 
 The HuffPost/YouGov gave respondents the option to answer "I don’t care either way," which was the most common answer among Republicans and Trump voters.
 So, among these four polls, support for Trump wearing a mask ranges between 63% and 72% among all types of voters, but it drops to between 38% and 58% among Republicans. And the Navigation Research poll found that 54% of Republicans approve of Trump’s decision not to wear a mask.
 Our ruling
 Jackson said "two-thirds of Americans disapprove of Donald Trump not wearing a face mask in public and the vast majority supports elected officials being required to wear masks in government buildings."
 In each of five polls, between 63% and 72% of all respondents said Trump should wear a mask. We rate the claim True.
Gov. Roy Cooper has kept gyms and fitness centers closed during the coronavirus outbreak, drawing criticism from his Republican challenger.
 The number of COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations has been steadily rising in the Tar Heel state, according to the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services.
 Cooper has said he worries that the heavy breathing associated with exercise could increase the spread of the virus. But Lt. Gov. Dan Forest, the Republican who hopes to unseat Cooper in November, criticized the governor for picking pandemic "winners and losers."
 On Monday, Forest said North Carolina is one of only a fraction of states keeping gyms closed.
 "Now, 46 states have gyms/fitness centers open - North Carolina is one of four states that does not," Forest tweeted. 
 
 Is that true?
 Generally speaking, yes. Some states are taking a regional approach to reopening gyms. In those states, gyms are allowed to open in some counties but not others. Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York and North Carolina are the only states where governors are keeping gyms closed across the board.
 Tracking reopenings
 Our review of virus-related executive orders tracked by CNN, the New York Times, the Washington Post and the National Governors Association backs up Forest’s assessment.
 Our review of these websites found that Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York and North Carolina are the only states keeping gyms closed across the board.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Most other states have either reopened gyms with restrictions, or reopened gyms in some areas but not others. For example, in California, gyms are allowed to reopen in all but seven counties.
 In Pennsylvania, 54 of the state’s 67 counties had entered a "green phase" by June 19, meaning gyms could reopen at reduced capacity. But 13 counties remained in the "yellow phase," meaning their gyms were still closed.
 Things are moving a little slower in Washington, where less than half of the state’s 39 counties have entered Phase 3. That’s the phase when gyms can reopen at less than 50% capacity, according to the Seattle Times.
 In Michigan, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer allowed some gyms to open on June 10, while others remained closed because they didn’t meet the state’s qualifications to reopen. But a federal judge recently halted the order, allowing all gyms to open on June 25. They’ll remain closed if Whitmer’s appeal is successful.
 A similar situation happened in Wisconsin, too. Gov. Tony Evers didn’t lift his ban on gym operations. The ban was dissolved after the state Supreme Court struck down his stay-at-home order.
 Our ruling
 Forest tweeted that "46 states have gyms/fitness centers open" and that "North Carolina is one of four states that does not."
 Our review found that North Carolina, New Jersey, New York and Massachusetts are the only states where gyms remain closed across the state.
 It’s worth noting that, in other states, government leaders are opening gyms in some counties, but not others. But Forest’s wording is broad enough to account for that variation. 
 We rate this claim True.
A TikTok post shows a video of law enforcement officers chasing two women in a mall and using strong physical force to overpower and detain them.
 "Paris police beat a woman for shopping at a mall with no vaccine passport," the text on the video reads. The video was also reshared on Twitter by podcaster and comedian Joe Rogan. 
 TikTok identified this video as part of its efforts to counter inauthentic, misleading or false content. (Read more about PolitiFact's partnership with TikTok.)
 The video clearly shows the women being struck and tackled by uniformed police, but the women weren’t shoppers — they were a part of a group of anti-vaccine protesters that made their way into the mall.
 On July 12, French President Emmanuel Macron announced a mandate that public places like malls, restaurants and hospitals must require a COVID-19 pass showing proof of vaccination or a negative COVID-19 test. 
 Since the mandate, there have been weeks of protests from anti-vaccine advocates, resulting in some clashes with police. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On Sept. 4, thousands of people demonstrated across Paris in protest of the mandate, and news articles and social media posts and videos showed a large group forcing their way into the Westfield Forum Des Halles, a shopping mall connected to the Châtelet-Les Halles train station. Forum Des Halles noted on its website that it only requires COVID-19 passes to access its cinema and restaurants. Masks and social distancing are required throughout the mall. 
 Twitter posts show the protesters inside the mall chanting "liberté" and confronting the deployed Motorized Violent Action Repression Brigade police unit, or BRAV-M. Images and reports show that the two women from the TikTok video were among the protesters to be detained by the police. 
 Our ruling
 A TikTok post showed two women being overtaken, struck and detained by police inside a Paris mall, claiming to show that one of them was beaten while shopping. 
 The video does show that the police used physical force to subdue the women, but more context is needed. The women were part of a wave of anti-vaccine protesters who forced their way into the mall.
 The protest inside the mall was just one of many across Paris, as anti-vaccine advocates decry mandated COVID-19 passes.
 We rate this claim Half True.
Wisconsin students, parents and educators shouldered a heavy burden over the past year: A patchwork of in-person, hybrid and virtual schooling as the coronavirus devastated the state.
 Last March, Gov. Tony Evers closed K-12 schools in an attempt to limit the spread of the virus. A closure meant to last two weeks ended up lasting till the school year’s end, and in the fall, only some returned to the classroom full-time.
 Reopening decisions have been fraught with controversy. In Madison, teachers taught outside school buildings in early March 2021 to protest their district’s plan to resume in-person learning, arguing it should have been postponed until staff could get vaccinated.
 On the flip side, in early February Republicans in the state Legislature moved to send $66 million in federal aid to schools already holding in-person classes. "The bottom line is our kids need to be in school," state Sen. Howard Marklein, R-Spring Green, said at the time.
 Evers has said he wants the decision to reopen to be left up to individual school districts because those officials will best understand how much of a threat COVID-19 poses in their community, a stance in line with Wisconsin’s status as a local-control state.
 Appearing on Capital City Sunday on March 14, 2021, the governor said he’s spoken with many superintendents who’ve successfully managed in-person school since last September.
 That success depends on class sizes, building ventilation and the landscape of local virus transmission — all factors he said would make it difficult to make a statewide judgment on returning to classrooms.
 "There’s still a handful of school districts out," Evers said, but added that he’d like to get students back in school.
 Is he correct that just a handful of districts are still learning largely online?
 Let’s take a look.
 
 Only state’s two largest school districts remain largely virtual, survey finds
 
 State officials have chosen not to track district reopenings since the end of mandatory closures last June.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, a USA TODAY Network-Wisconsin survey of Wisconsin’s regional education agencies found that every district currently has at least some in-person instruction, and only the Madison Metropolitan School District and Milwaukee Public Schools remain mostly virtual.
 In Madison, only the youngest students have returned to school buildings, while students in grades 3 and up are set to return in phases beginning in April. MPS offers an in-person option for some students with disabilities and could begin bringing others back starting April 12, 2021.
 Wisconsin has 12 Cooperative Educational Service Agencies, known as CESAs, that help communicate between the state’s Department of Public Instruction and its 422 school districts. Seven CESA administrators surveyed said collectively, there were 150 districts in their jurisdiction where all students can attend school five days a week. Thirty-nine districts use a blended model, where students are in school part of the week and learn virtually on other days.
 Other CESA administrators said they weren’t tracking how many districts were teaching students in-person or blended, but did say all districts were back to some in-person learning.
 While some students have been back in the classroom since September, more moved to come back after winter break. Such was the case for the Appleton Area School District, for example, the sixth-largest in the state.
 School districts generally have virtual options for students and families who did not feel safe returning to the school building, the survey found.
 David Honish, agency administrator of CESA 8 in northeastern Wisconsin, told a reporter that "you have people almost making the assumption" that districts aren’t back face-to-face, even when that isn’t the case.
 While many districts in his region began the school year virtually or in a hybrid model, most have returned to in-person learning, Honish said, with a few exceptions — including one high school that went virtual for two weeks after a COVID-19 outbreak.
 Districts are required to notify their local health department when they learn of at least two confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the same building within two weeks. 
 
 Our ruling
 
 Evers said there were still a handful of districts learning mostly virtually.
 A USA TODAY Network-Wisconsin survey found only the state’s two largest school districts were keeping students mostly virtual, although even they have limited in-person options and are planning April returns.
 We rate his claim True.
The Iowa Democratic Party claims in its 2020 campaign against U.S. Sen. Joni Ernst, R-Iowa, that Ernst reversed her support for a coronavirus relief plan 3.5, which offered nearly half a trillion dollars for small businesses, hospitals and testing.
 The Iowa Democratic Party claimed in the headline of an April 21 statement that Ernst opposed funding for hospitals and COVID-19 testing for weeks before $75 billion to reimburse health-care providers and $25 billion for COVID-19 diagnostic testing was included in an interim coronavirus relief bill passed by the Senate April 21 and signed by President Trump April 24. It’s a claim Democrats have continued to make against Ernst.
 Both Republicans and Democrats blocked interim economic relief packages proposed by the other party in April before the final half-a-trillion-dollar package cleared the Senate. The Republicans’ proposal would’ve solely funded the quickly depleted Paycheck Protection Program, a loan program created by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act and launched April 4 for businesses that keep employees on their payroll. Democrats pushed for a $500-billion-dollar-plus aid package with Paycheck Protection Program funds as well as $100 billion for hospitals and $150 billion for state and local government, of which some of the hospital funds made it into the final deal.
 Iowa Democratic Party Communications Director Jeremy Busch referred in an interview with The Daily Iowan to a series of interviews and public statements Ernst made in April as proof her tune had changed on the expanded relief funding. 
 As negotiations on refilling the Paycheck Protection Program were ongoing, Ernst said in an April 16 Fox News interview she supported the program and disagreed with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi that Congress should wait.
 "We have small businesses that desperately need this funding to keep their employees on payroll. If they can't do that, those employees will go unemployed and that is not the route. So, I do believe that what we had was a narrowly crafted bill to replenish the funds for PPP, but the Democrats wanted to hijack it with unrelated items and additional changes. We have a program that's working, now we need to make sure that it's properly funded."
 In an email to the Daily Iowan's PolitiFact Iowa, Ernst’s spokesperson, Brendan Conley, wrote that Ernst’s comment on "unrelated items and additional changes" referred to an early House version of what eventually became the CARES Act, the third relief bill. The version Conley referred to was noted in a March 23 article in the Hill; it didn’t clear the Senate but included funding to curb airline pollution. However, the Paycheck Protection Program launched after that article, on April 3, as part of the $2.2 trillion CARES Act, making it unlikely that the narrowly crafted bill to replenish the funds for PPP referred to the measure that created the loan program.
 The proposal that better fits what Ernst is describing in the Fox News interview would’ve bumped up funding for the Paycheck Protection Program. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky, asked senators on April 9 to approve with unanimous consent a measure that would have added $250 million in federal funds to the Paycheck Protection Program. He argued on the Senate floor that the small business loan program's funds were running out and that negotiations for hospital, local government, and test funding should be part of a separate congressional package at a later date. The reason: the extra funding wouldn’t pass unanimously, he said.
 However, McConnell’s measure did not receive unanimous consent, as two Democrats voiced opposition. No formal recorded vote was taken to gauge Senate support for the initial proposal, so there's no formal record of Ernst's support or opposition to that measure.
 Minutes after the two Democratic senators from Maryland rejected McConnell’s ask to fast-track the measure, the pair proposed their own amendment which was double the dollar figure of McConnell’s. It included $100 billion for hospitals dealing with COVID-19 and $150 billion for state and local governments. 
 A final proposal to McConnell’s original interim bill included $500 billion for hospitals, the Paycheck Protection Program and COVID-19 testing, but none for local government. The Senate approved that measure April 21 with unanimous consent, a procedural fast-tracking move that means no senators voiced opposition. Again, the Senate didn’t record a vote tally, but Conley wrote to the DI in an email that Ernst supported that half-a-trillion-dollar bill.
 A day before the final proposal was approved in the Senate, Ernst said in an April 20 town hall, that she supported the $3.5 coronavirus relief bill’s extra $75 billion to reimburse health-care providers and $25 billion for COVID-19 diagnostic testing.
 "We will also get the additional dollars we wanted for diagnostic testing an additional $25 billion there as well as another $75 billion for our hospitals. And again this is something that I’ve pushed for because we want to make sure that our rural hospitals are sustaining through this COVID-19 pandemic," Ernst said.
 Conley wrote in an April 24 email to the Daily Iowan:
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Sen. Ernst fully supports the additional funding for hospitals and testing — which are very much related to the COVID-19 pandemic — as she reiterated on Monday (April 20), and that's exactly why she supported the bill that passed the Senate this week. Her voting record shows, in no uncertain terms, that she supports those measures."
 In other statements as well before the final interim package passed, Ernst reiterated her support for a narrower agreement.
 According to a RadioIowa report, Ernst said April 16 that discussions about extra funding for hospitals and local governments could wait until Congress passed the PPP funds. 
 "No political gimmicks, just a simple ask to put more money in this program," RadioIowa reported Ernst saying. "Unfortunately, politics got in the way."
 In a statement from Ernst’s office April 9, the day Democrats and Republicans rejected each others’ interim relief plans, Ernst criticized Democrats for rejecting Republicans’ proposal, stating that passing small business loan relief funds was too urgent to delay. 
 "After hearing from Iowans and seeing the overwhelming response of small businesses across the country, it’s clear we need to bolster the Paycheck Protection Program. We don’t have time for political games; we’re in a crisis. Workers and employers in Iowa and across the country need this relief now more than ever, so let’s put aside the politics and swiftly get this specific additional support for small businesses approved so money can keep flowing, Iowa workers can continue to collect a paycheck, and our state’s small businesses can stay afloat," Ernst said.
 Congress put $350 billion toward the PPP at it's creation. The program stopped taking applications when the funds ran dry April 16 date, and resumed taking applications April 27.
 The interim package was one of several COVID-19 relief packages Congress has passed. 
 Our ruling
 The Iowa Democratic Party claimed that Ernst reversed her support for a coronavirus relief in a recent bill that offered nearly half a trillion dollars for small businesses, hospitals and testing.
 Due to a lack of concrete voting record, we reviewed Ernst's statements before and after the passage of the interim coronavirus-relief bill. 
 Ernst hasn't said she directly opposed hospital funding, but in public statements she was critical of putting a proposal on the floor with funding that was more broad than the Paycheck Protection Program.
 When Democrats brought their version of the interim relief proposal, which included extra dollars for hospitals and local government, to the senate floor April 9, McConnell objected. Ernst is the Vice Chair of the Senate GOP Conference, meaning she is part of Republican leadership.
 However, she didn’t vote down additional funds for hospitals or COVID-19 testing in the final half-a-trillion-dollar package. She said later she pushed for hospital funding included in the interim relief package. But, she never said she directly opposed that funding. Rather, she said it should be discussed at a later date. 
 The claim is partially accurate but needs additional context. We rate it Half True.
The No. 1 thing Americans can do to prevent the spread of COVID-19 is wash their hands. That’s because you can contract the virus by touching surfaces that have the respiratory droplets of an infected person on them.
 But how long can coronavirus germs live on those surfaces? An infographic from KIRO-TV in Seattle offers some clarity.
 According to the graphic, which was published March 18 on Facebook, the coronavirus can live for "up to 3 hours in the air, up to 4 hours on copper, up to 24 hours on cardboard up to 3 days on plastic and stainless steel."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) But in this case, the latest research backs it up — so keep washing your hands and disinfecting your home.
 
 The graphic cites an article published in the New England Journal of Medicine on March 17. Researchers tested how long the coronavirus, formally called SARS-CoV-2, lived on five different surfaces: aerosols, plastic, stainless steel, copper and cardboard.
 "SARS-CoV-2 remained viable in aerosols throughout the duration of our experiment (3 hours)," the authors wrote. "SARS-CoV-2 was more stable on plastic and stainless steel than on copper and cardboard."
 Aside from air, the worst surface for the virus is copper; researchers could only detect viable virus particles there for up to four hours. On cardboard, they could not detect any after 24 hours. The coronavirus lives the longest on plastic and stainless steel — up to three days.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It’s worth noting that the article is not a peer-reviewed study, and researchers tested the lifespan of SARS-CoV-2 in a lab setting. But their findings reflect what others have found about the potential longevity of the coronavirus outside the body.
  
 An article published in the Journal of Hospital Infection in March reviewed what other scientists have found about how long human coronaviruses can survive on different surfaces. The authors found that viruses like Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), which are both similar to COVID-19, could live for a couple of days on steel, plastic, wood, paper and glass surfaces.
 What about money, which many Americans handle every day? The World Health Organization advises people to wash their hands with soap and water after handling banknotes, coins and credit cards.
 The Journal of Hospital Infection article says human coronaviruses could live on paper for anywhere between one to five days. The U.S. Dollar is made up of 75% cotton and 25% linen, as opposed to wood pulp, which is the base for most paper.
 Still, you’re probably safer handling coins. The New England Journal of Medicine article found that COVID-19 can only survive for up to four hours on copper, which is what quarters, nickels and dimes are primarily made of. Ironically, pennies are made primarily of zinc, although they have a copper exterior.
 Based on the information available, KIRO-TV’s infographic is accurate. But we’ll issue a small note of caution because the study has not been peer-reviewed. Mostly True.
With North Carolina initially among the slower states to administer coronavirus vaccines, reporters are raising questions about the effectiveness of its rollout.
 In a press conference on Jan. 21, a reporter asked Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Mandy Cohen how many shots had been misused or gone to waste.
 "We as a state don’t want to waste any vaccine. We are seeing very small numbers of vaccine waste recorded in our CVMS system, but it’s very few, like in the tens of doses," Cohen responded.
 Is North Carolina’s spoil number "very small," even "in the tens?" 
 The state health department says, on average, it’s receiving reports of fewer than 10 spoiled doses per provider. However, the total number of spoiled doses is in the four digits, not two. 
 A day after Cohen’s briefing, North Carolina’s health department told the Associated Press that a total of 1,280 doses had been discarded.
 About the discrepancy
 We asked the department about the comments Cohen made on Thursday. Was she describing the 1,280 number? Had she seen that specific 1,280 figure? 
 Chris Mackey, the department’s director of communications, said no.
 Cohen hadn’t seen the specific total when she spoke at that Jan. 21 briefing, Mackey said, because the department didn’t run a report on the numbers until later. Cohen based her comments on "one-off conversations" with other health officials.
 "We ran a report when someone asked us for it. Mandy didn’t have the number," Mackey said in a phone interview. "She was trying to say we haven’t seen any big incidents of vaccine waste."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The 1,280 spoiled doses account for 0.1% of the 1.1 million doses in the state, the department said in an email. 
 There are 250 healthcare providers administering the shots, the email said, meaning the losses average out to about five doses per provider.
 Comparing states
 It’s difficult to know how North Carolina’s numbers compare with other states.
 The CDC has instructed states to report vaccine waste into its tracking system, agency spokeswoman Kristen Nordlund told PolitiFact. However, ProPublica reporters found that some states aren’t tracking their spoiled doses.
 "We are working to figure out how to provide this data online in the future when the data is more complete," Nordlund said.
 A 2019 report from the World Health Organization says vaccine waste is expected to be anywhere between 5% and 20% during mass vaccination campaigns. 
 There are reports of other states losing hundreds of doses in single incidents.
 Wisconsin received national attention when authorities charged a local pharmacist with deliberately destroying around 500 doses of the vaccine.
 In Massachusetts, NBC News reported that a Veterans Affairs hospital lost 1,900 doses after a cleaning contractor accidentally unplugged a refrigerator. In Ohio, the Columbus Dispatch reported, a pharmacy spoiled 890 doses by failing to keep them properly stored. In another case, nearly 12,000 doses spoiled on the way to Michigan after the shipping truck got too cold.
 Our ruling
 Cohen said the health department is receiving reports of "very small numbers of vaccine waste … but it’s very few, like in the tens of doses." The health department provided clarity on Cohen’s remarks a day later. 
 It’s fair to say the rate of vaccine spoilage is "very small" — a tenth of 1%. However, it was inaccurate for Cohen to say the number was "in the tens." The total number was 1,280.
 We rate this claim Half True.
It’s hard to find something that hasn’t changed in Wisconsin amid the coronavirus pandemic — work, school, church, home.
 On the eve of Gov. Tony Evers’ "Safer at Home" order limiting all non-essential movement, a Republican lawmaker lamented the last item on that list.
 "Laura, my eight children and I are enjoying our last legal dinner together this evening from our spring break staycation," state Sen. Duey Stroebel, R-Saukville, said in a March 24, 2020, tweet.
 Evers’ 16-page order — which took effect March 25, 2020 — has sweeping consequences throughout the state, but does it really ban family dinners?
 Let’s take a closer look.
 Key detail left out
 At first glance, Stroebel’s claim to legal limitations within his home might sound off base. The order explicitly makes an allowance for family units.
 It says Wisconsinites "do not need to maintain social distancing between family members in a single living unit or household members." A later section adds, "Nothing in this Order prohibits the gathering of members of a single household or living unit."
 Laura, my eight children and I are enjoying our last legal dinner together this evening from our spring break staycation. https://t.co/Cllv1Gbgho— Duey Stroebel (@SenStroebel) March 24, 2020 
 But it turns out Stroebel wasn’t referencing a single household.
 John Soper, Stroebel’s chief of staff, said in an email the senator’s eight children range in age from 14 to 29. Only three of those children live at home, while five have their own residences.
 "Governor Evers mentioned specifically ‘dinner parties’ as an activity that must stop under the new Order," Soper said. "Senator Stroebel put out this tweet to highlight that there is no exemption for meeting immediate family (adult children, grandparents etc.), but there is for places like liquor stores and dry cleaners."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That changes the analysis dramatically.
 Order bans combining households – even for family
 Indeed, there is no blanket exception to social distancing requirements for extended or even immediate family members if they live separately.
 Here’s the key line from Evers’ order: "All public and private gatherings of any number of people that are not part of a single household or living unit are prohibited, except for the limited purposes expressly permitted in this Order."
 Those "limited purposes" include things like providing care or transport for the health and safety of someone in another household.
 "Large family dinners that include people who do not live together are prohibited," said Melissa Baldauff, Evers’ spokeswoman.
 She said it’s a requirement that affects everyone, including Evers.
 "That’s really hard on extended families, we get it," she said in an email. "The governor’s grown kids and their families aren’t coming to visit him and the first lady at the executive residence right now.
 "But that’s the sacrifice we are asking of everyone in this state. Stay home and limit the number of people you have contact with. This kind of distancing is one of the most effective ways of stopping the spread of the disease."
 Our ruling
 Stroebel said in a tweet before the stay-at-home order that he was having his "last legal dinner" with his wife and eight children.
 Though this is technically true for Stroebel’s family, people reading this tweet could well take away that their own one-household family can’t get together to eat. To that extent, the tweet is misleading. 
 There’s a key difference between families that still live together under the same roof and those like Stroebel’s with adult children – to the point that Evers’ order allows one and bans the other.
 So Stroebel is accurate, but only if you take into account key details that weren’t included in his tweet.
 That’s our definition of Half True.
Amid the spread of the novel coronavirus, many people are wondering how likely they are to get it.
 Often, their second question is: If I get coronavirus, how likely am I to survive it?
 One chart, created by the website Information is Beautiful, says that 80% of coronavirus cases are "mild."
 
 So is that true?
 The chart is a tad misleading. It makes a blanket statement about the virus while basing its claim on a study by China’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and a website called Statistica. The post doesn’t include links to the reports.
 An important note: The percentage of mild cases shouldn’t be confused with your likelihood of surviving a stint of the virus, also known as COVID-19. Mortality rates differ depending on a person’s age and health.
 The virus is relatively new. So there’s a lot researchers have yet to nail down. That said, the post is mostly consistent with available data.
 So far, most cases are mild
 In February, CNN reported on the release of the study conducted by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention and published in the Chinese Journal of Epidemiology.
 The study itself said that in confirmed coronavirus cases, 70% were "normal," 25.5% were "severe" and 4.5% were "light."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of World Health Organization, said during a press conference on Feb. 17 that more than 80% of patients "have mild disease and will recover."
 Meanwhile, 13.8% of cases suffer severe symptoms and 6.1% are critical.
 What the CDC says
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s website on March 13 said a "complete clinical picture with regard to COVID-19 is not fully known." However, the CDC said "most cases" are mild, citing a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine.
 That study looked at medical records for coronavirus patients documented by the National Health Commission between Dec. 11 and Jan. 29.
 "On admission, the degree of severity of COVID-19 was categorized as nonsevere in 926 patients and severe in 173 patients," the study reads. That means 84 percent were considered non-severe.
 Age and baseline health were factors in whether a patient’s illness became severe, the study said. 
 "Patients with severe disease were older than those with nonsevere disease by a median of seven years. Moreover, the presence of any coexisting illness was more common among patients with severe disease than among those with nonsevere disease," it said.
 Our ruling
 The chart says 80.9% of cases are mild. It’s important to note that different age groups have had different levels of severity.
 However, generally speaking, the chart is on track. We found that mild cases account for roughly 75-to-80% of cases, according to studies published by the WHO and CDC.
 The statement is mostly accurate but needs clarification or additional information. We rate it Mostly True.
President Donald Trump routinely claims that he went against everyone’s wishes when he decided to restrict travel from China to curb the spread of the coronavirus in the United States. Because he did, and fast, thousands of lives were saved, Trump says.
 But Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, said Trump’s response wasn’t all that quick.
 Biden told ABC’s George Stephanopoulos on April 5 that Trump trailed dozens of other countries in issuing travel restrictions on China. (This was a week before Stephanopoulos confirmed he had COVID-19.)
 "He indicated that I complimented him on dealing with China. Well, you know, 45 nations had already moved to keep, block China's personnel from being able to come to the United States before the president moved," Biden said. "It's about pace. It's about the urgency. And I don't think there's been enough of it, urgency."
 PolitiFact decided to put Biden’s claim on the Truth-O-Meter. Taken literally, Biden’s statement that 45 countries blocked Chinese personnel from "being able to come to the United States" doesn’t make sense — the countries were dealing with travel from China into their own countries, of course. Biden’s campaign did not provide an on-the-record clarification.
 Based on the context of the interview, Biden’s point was that 45 nations imposed restrictions on travel from China before the United States’ own restriction, therefore the United States was slow on this front. We found that the United States acted around the same time as did many other countries. It wasn’t the first to restrict travel from China, but it wasn’t the last, either.
 Timeline of restrictions on travel from China
 COVID-19, the respiratory disease caused by the new coronavirus, was first detected in Wuhan, China, and was reported by Chinese authorities to the World Health Organization on Dec. 31, 2019.
 On Jan. 30, the World Health Organization declared a public health emergency of international concern over the coronavirus outbreak.
 On Jan. 31, the Trump administration announced the United States would temporarily ban the admission of people who were in China 14 days prior to their attempted travel to the United States. The restriction took effect Feb. 2, and it exempted U.S. citizens, green card holders, and certain other people.
 What was the rest of the world considering? We consulted Think Global Health, an initiative of the U.S.-based Council on Foreign Relations that is tracking travel restrictions on China due to COVID-19.
 By the group’s count, Biden is correct about 45 nations restricting travel from China before the United States.That number covers variations of travel restrictions in effect up to and including Feb. 1.
 Think Global Health’s tracker includes partial or total land border closures, suspension of flights to and from China, visa restrictions, such as a pause on visa-on-arrival programs, and entry restrictions (similar to what the United States implemented).
 "While the United States was not one of the first countries to impose restrictions against travel from China, nor was it late to do so relative to the actions of others," said Samantha Kiernan, a research associate at the Council on Foreign Relations. "Rather, the United States acted around the same time that many other countries did."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Marshall Islands is among nations that had travel restrictions on China even before the World Health Organization’s Jan. 30 declaration. After the declaration, many countries, including the United States, announced their own travel restrictions.
 For perspective, the U.S. measure went into effect after Italy on Jan. 31 suspended all flights to and from China, but it happened before South Korea’s entry restriction that started Feb. 4.
 There are many ways to slice the numbers on travel restrictions, said Alex Nowrasteh, director of immigration studies at the libertarian Cato Institute. In a March 23 blog post, Nowrasteh estimated that at least 36 other countries imposed travel restrictions on people coming from China around the same time as the United States.
 "Some countries, for instance, began forcing Chinese nationals to get a visa around this time whereas before they were allowed visa-free entry," Nowrasteh said. "That’s an additional travel restriction, but a less onerous one than that imposed by President Trump."
 Nowrasteh agreed that the United States’ restriction wasn’t far behind from others.
 "There are many points on which to criticize the Trump administration’s response to COVID-19, but they were not slow in instituting a travel ban on China," Nowrasteh said. "The real question is whether that restriction worked and there is little evidence to suggest that it did."
 RELATED: Are COVID-19 travel restrictions ‘more critical in saving lives’ than testing? Not really
 Global health specialists told Kaiser Health News that there is little to no evidence that Trump’s restrictions restrained COVID-19, because they came too late and didn’t have the follow-up necessary to make a real dent.
 Research suggests that well-implemented travel restrictions can buy time, but that time has to be used effectively — to ramp up emergency preparedness and bolster activities like testing and isolating people who may have been exposed.
 As late as Feb. 29, the WHO advised against travel or trade restrictions related to COVID-19 outbreaks, saying: "Travel bans to affected areas or denial of entry to passengers coming from affected areas are usually not effective in preventing the importation of cases but may have a significant economic and social impact." 
 Our ruling
 Biden claimed that "45 nations had already moved" to enforce travel restrictions with China "before the president moved."
 The extent of travel restrictions vary — from the suspension of visa programs to entry denial. According to one tracker of travel restrictions, Biden’s 45 figure checks out. Other research shows that the number is around 36.
 Where Biden misleads is on the relative speed of the U.S. compared with others. The U.S. travel restriction came shortly after the WHO declared a public health emergency and around the same time as other nations, experts said.
 Biden’s statement that Trump’s travel restriction was slower than 45 other countries is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. We rate it Half True.
In the long hours of debate before Senate Democrats passed their sweeping COVID-19 relief package, Republicans offered amendments designed to put Democrats on record on very particular policy points.
 Sens. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., and Bill Cassidy, R-La., put forward one that would prevent $1,400 stimulus checks from going to prisoners. The amendment failed on a party-line vote.
 Cotton tweeted that this was another example of spending tucked in the bill that had nothing to do with pandemic.
 "Senate Democrats just voted to give stimulus checks to criminals in prison," he tweeted March 6. "They haven’t lost their jobs, they aren’t worried about paying rent or buying groceries."
 Senate Democrats just voted to give stimulus checks to criminals in prison. 
 
 They haven’t lost their jobs, they aren’t worried about paying rent or buying groceries. 
 
 Another example of the unrelated spending in the Democrats’ partisan slush fund.— Tom Cotton (@SenTomCotton) March 6, 2021 
 Cotton repeated his point March 8 on Fox News, saying "every single Democrat" wanted to send checks to prisoners — invoking Boston Marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Charleston, S.C., church shooter Dylann Roof.
 The record shows that Democrats rejected the amendment to prevent payments to prisoners.
 Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., said it would harm prisoners’ families.
 "Given the stark racial disparities in our criminal justice system, this would cause the most harm to Black and brown families and communities already harmed by mass incarceration," Durbin said on the Senate floor. "Children should not be forced to go hungry because a parent is incarcerated."
 Prisoners qualify for stimulus payments because of broad eligibility requirements in this relief bill — and others. Prisoners must be a citizen or legal resident, and either need to have filed a tax return, possibly as part of a joint filing, or complete an Internal Revenue Service form requesting payment. 
 It’s worth noting that the two previous rounds of stimulus checks during the Trump administration — in the CARES Act in March, and the supplemental package in December — allowed prisoners to receive checks, too.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cotton voted for both of those bills.
 His press secretary James Arnold said circumstances were different. In the CARES Act, the issue was "an unanticipated problem," and in December, there was no opportunity to amend the bill.
 The issue had come up before.
 In 2009, President Barack Obama’s economic recovery package barred stimulus checks for most prisoners. Only a few thousand got them, through an exception in the law for those who had just gone to jail.
 In 2020, Washington put a priority on getting checks to people as quickly as possible. The CARES Act kept the eligibility rules broad and simple. Basically, anyone who was an American citizen or permanent legal resident, wasn’t claimed as a dependent by someone else, and had filed a tax return (or didn’t need to because they made very little), could get a check.
 With the December bill, Republicans could have added a prisoner ban to the legislation before it came to an up-or-down vote.
 The issue of prisoners and stimulus checks had long been in the news. Earlier in the year, the IRS blocked CARES Act payments to prisoners. That prompted a class action lawsuit on behalf of incarcerated people, arguing that the IRS rule was arbitrary and unlawful.
 In October, a federal judge ruled against the IRS and said the government had to issue the checks. The judge ruled that the CARES Act had no language restricting payments to prisoners, and the administration couldn’t invent one. That only applied to the CARES Act, but the point is, Republicans had ample opportunity to grapple with the issue as the December bill was being written.
 Despite having the right to stimulus checks, many prisoners hit a stumbling block: The IRS sent the inmates debit cards that some states couldn’t process. 
 Our ruling
 Cotton said Democrats voted to give stimulus checks to people in prison.
 They did, arguing that to do otherwise would harm the families of prisoners. It’s worth noting that Cotton and other Senate Republicans voted for previous relief packages that also resulted in prisoners getting checks. 
 With that clarification, we rate this claim Mostly True.
With so much emphasis on vaccination to fight the coronavirus pandemic, it was startling to see one of the three vaccines used in the United States pegged as only 42% effective. 
 An Instagram post using that figure has spread widely on social media.
 The post is an image of a tweet by conservative activist Jack Posobiec. The tweet says:
 "BREAKING: Biden Admin Concerned as Mayo Clinic Study Shows Pfizer Vaccine Dropped to 42% Effective."
 A similar headline appears on an article in Human Events, where Posobiec is a senior editor. 
 The Instagram post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 We found that it leaves out important context about the study and its findings.
 How the study was done
 The Mayo Clinic study was posted Aug. 9 on a website for preprints. Preprint studies are preliminary, in that they have not yet been peer reviewed by other experts, and "should not be used to guide clinical practice," says a notice posted with the study.
 The researchers compared the effectiveness of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines in the Mayo Clinic Health System (Arizona, Florida, Iowa, Minnesota and Wisconsin) from January to July. (The Johnson & Johnson vaccine was not part of the study.)
 The researchers analyzed the records of adults who had received at least one dose of either vaccine and had not tested positive for COVID-19 prior to their first dose. Both the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines call for two doses.
 Key findings
 The study found the following:
 
 
 Overall, both vaccines were "proven to reduce the burden of symptomatic disease, hospitalization, and death related to SARS-CoV-2 infection. This study further supports the effectiveness of both vaccines in doing so, even despite the evolution of more transmissible viral variants."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For preventing hospitalization, Moderna’s vaccine was 91.6% effective over the seven-month period, and Pfizer’s was 85% effective.
 
 
 For preventing infection, Moderna’s vaccine was 86% effective over the seven months, and Pfizer’s was 76% effective.
 
 
 What gained notice were the figures for July, when the more contagious delta variant took hold across the U.S. and hit Florida especially hard. For that month alone, the vaccines’ effectiveness in preventing hospitalization remained high — 81% for Moderna’s and 75% for Pfizer’s — but was lower for preventing infection — 76% for Moderna’s and 42% for Pfizer’s.
 Calling the study’s data "very preliminary" and "limited in geographic scope," Mayo told PolitiFact in a statement:
 "We caution against drawing conclusions about vaccine effectiveness from a preprint study, which is intended only to be helpful to the scientific community and has not yet undergone the rigor of peer review."
 The study authors noted: "It is important to realize that most vaccines are not 100% effective, particularly against asymptomatic infections. For example, the estimated effectiveness of seasonal influenza vaccines has ranged from 19-60% over the past decade."
 It’s also worth noting that since the delta variant became the dominant strain of the virus, COVID-19 hospitalizations and death have occurred predominantly among people who have not been vaccinated.
 In total, as of Aug. 9, 2021, more than 166 million people in the United States had been fully vaccinated and, based on reports from 49 U.S. states and territories, there were 8,054 breakthrough cases in which the person was hospitalized or died, according to the latest figures from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That comes out to fewer than one-hundredth of 1%.
 Seven states, including some with the lowest vaccination rates, accounted for about half of new cases and hospitalizations in the previous week, the White House said at a briefing Aug. 5. They include Florida (49.7% fully vaccinated), Texas (44.6%), Missouri (42.3%), Arkansas (37.7%), Louisiana (37.7%), Alabama (35%) and Mississippi (35.2%). As of Aug. 12, according to Mayo Clinic, 50.6% of the U.S. population is fully vaccinated.
 Our ruling
 An Instagram post claims: "Mayo Clinic study shows Pfizer vaccine dropped to 42% effective."
 The Mayo study, which is not yet peer-reviewed, looked at people who had received at least one dose of the two-shot Pfizer and Moderna vaccines. It found that from January to July 2021, the Pfizer vaccine was 85% effective in preventing hospitalization and 76% effective in preventing infection.
 In July alone, after the virus’ more contagious delta variant had taken hold, Pfizer’s vaccine was 75% effective in preventing hospitalization but only 42% in preventing infection.
 The statement is partially accurate, but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
Some Africans living in China are being evicted from their homes amid fears of a second wave of the coronavirus in the country where it originated. Social media posts about about the matter caught our attention, including this video shared on Facebook:
 "Africans living in China now being forced to sleep outside in the cold," reads the caption at the top. A narrator in the video states that "Africans have become subject of racial profiling" as "Chinese nationals blame them for the rising number of ner coronavirus cases in the country."
 The video, which carries a logo from The Savoy Show on it and appears to be a news story, was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 However, in this case, it is accurate. Africans in at least one Chinese city are facing widespread evictions and discrimination related to COVID-19 fears.
 Numerous legitimate news reports describe such targeted evictions, stemming from fears of another COVID-19 outbreak, in the southern China city of Guangzhou. Home to many Africans, Guangzhou has long been one of China’s main commercial and trading centers.
 One report cited a case in which a police officer accompanied a landlord on an eviction of an African. Black residents in a part of Guangzhou known as "Little Africa" are being forced to remain inside their apartments — even if they have not traveled anywhere that would warrant a quarantine — and submit to coronavirus tests, the Washington Post reported. Chinese officials say they are trying to prevent a second wave of the coronavirus, focusing on foreigners, according to Al Jazeera. President Xi Jinping urged authorities to carefully watch for imported cases from ​other countries, state news agency Xinhua reported. But China has denied racism in the effort.
 But the actions are widespread enough, according to the Associated Press, that African officials are confronting China over racist treatment of Africans, including Africans being ejected from hotels in the middle of the night.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Chinese embassy in Zimbabwe said: "It is harmful to sensationalize isolated incidents. China treats all individuals in the country, Chinese and foreign alike, as equals." The Guangdong provincial government has responded to concerns about discrimination by calling China and Africa good friends, partners and brothers, according to the BBC.
 More than two dozen Africans told CNN about being left without a home, being subject to random testing for COVID-19, or being quarantined for 14 days in their homes, despite having no symptoms or contact with known patients.
 Photos and videos posted on social media showed Africans sleeping on sidewalks or waiting under shop awnings after being ordered out of their apartments and hotel rooms, the Washington Post reported.
 And community leaders told the BBC that hundreds of Africans had been evicted after online rumors that coronavirus was spreading among African people. 
 Our ruling
 A video shared on Facebook claims that "Africans living in China now being forced to sleep outside in the cold."
 Numerous news articles report that, amid fears of a second wave of the coronavirus, China has focused on foreigners as a possible source of the virus, and Africans in the southern China city of Guangzhou are being evicted from their homes. African leaders have called out the evictions as racist.
 We rate this claim True.
When talks to extend emergency coronavirus unemployment relief broke down last month in Washington, U.S. Sen. Cory Booker blamed his wealthy colleagues for the impasse. 
 "I’m a little frustrated that a body dominated by millionaires, I’m not one of them, is going to focus on just a few hundred extra bucks and try to cut that out from under so many millions of American families," Booker said in an interview with NJTV News. 
 We wondered how many members of Congress’ upper chamber really are millionaires. 
 Net worth data compiled by the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics for 2018, the most recent year available, shows that almost two-thirds of U.S. senators’ net worth exceeds $1 million. And a few of them are exceptionally wealthy. 
 Financial disclosure forms lawmakers fill out don’t require exact values, only ranges of values, so the Center for Responsive Politics calculates lawmakers’ net worth by adding their range of assets, subtracting their range of liabilities, and calculating the midpoint of the resulting range. 
 U.S. Sen. Rick Scott, a Florida Republican, and U.S. Sen. Mark Warner, a Virginia Democrat, are the body’s wealthiest lawmakers. Each reported a net worth of more than $200 million dollars, the data show. 
 Two other senators reported net worths greater than $100 million — Mitt Romney, the former presidential candidate and Utah Republican, and Mike Braun, an Indiana Republican. 
 Fifty-seven other lawmakers reported net worths of between $1 million and $100 million, including Pennsylvania Republican Pat Toomey, who is worth about $2 million, the data show.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In the past, Roll Call analyzed lawmaker wealth by focusing on minimum net worth. 
 Booker’s comments came as the federal unemployment benefits Congress approved early in the pandemic were set to expire and negotiations over the next relief package stalled. Democrats want to keep offering unemployed Americans an extra $600 a week. Republicans want to see the extra benefits scaled back or eliminated. 
 Booker argued that the Senate’s millionaires don’t support extending the more generous benefits because they don’t know what it’s like to need that money for food and rent. But the Center for Responsive politics data shows that 25 of the Senate’s millionaires are Democrats who want to continue the expanded support. 
 Besides Warner, the wealthiest Senate Democrats are Dianne Feinstein of California and Michael Bennett of Colorado. 
 So, is Booker a millionaire? 
 No. 
 His net worth is $807,503, the data show. He has a checking account, a savings account, a pension, a money market account, and several IRAs. His staff also provided a copy of the financial disclosure form Booker filed with the Senate, and it shows the same. 
 The data show that Pennsylvania Democrat Bob Casey also has net worth below $1 million. 
 Our ruling
 Booker said that the Senate is "dominated by millionaires" and that he is "not one of them." Roughly two-thirds of U.S. senators are millionaires, and no, Booker isn’t one of them, data show. We rate this statement True.
A federal prosecutor and a state lawmaker from western New York sparred recently over the scale of coronavirus deaths in their state.
 In a May 30 op-ed in the Buffalo News, James P. Kennedy Jr., the U.S. Attorney for the Western District of New York, urged a quicker reopening of the economy, in part because he said that a failure to do so would cause psychological harm and spur deaths from drug abuse.
 In the op-ed, Kennedy said he has seen a "roughly three-fold increase in the number of drug overdose deaths" during the pandemic. As the country is struggling economically, he wrote, "such measures come at a cost that goes well beyond the adverse impact they have had on our economy."
 This argument drew a response from Monica P. Wallace, a Democratic assemblywoman for the 143rd District of New York. She told the Buffalo News that Kennedy glossed over the reality that significantly more people died due to the coronavirus in two months than died of overdoses all of last year.
 The Buffalo News paraphrased Wallace’s remark this way: "Wallace said Kennedy failed to mention that significantly more people died of Covid-19 in two months than died of overdoses all of last year or the year before."
 When we reached her, Wallace confirmed that the paraphrase was accurate.
 We found that her assertion is correct.
 How many COVID-19 related deaths were there in two months?
 For the number of coronavirus deaths, Wallace referred us to a count by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that found from the beginning of April until the end of May, approximately 96,647 people died in the United States.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The total number of deaths through mid-June was 103,339, according to the CDC. However, this may be an underestimate due to difficulties in collecting the full data.
 How many people have died of drug overdoses last year and the previous year? 
 For the number of overdoses, Wallace referred us to CDC data. 
 The CDC’s most recent full-year data is for 2018. That year, there were 67,367 drug overdose deaths. In 2017, there were 70,237 overdose deaths. 
 So the national figures show that the two-month toll of coronavirus deaths exceeded the year-long number of drug overdose deaths in both 2017 and 2018.
 The same was true for New York state. There were 21,964 coronavirus deaths in New York state between the start of April and the end of May, according to the COVID Tracking Project. That compares to 3,697 drug overdose deaths for all of 2018 in New York state and 3,921 in 2017.
 Our ruling
 Wallace said that significantly more people died of Covid-19 in two months than died of overdoses all of last year or the year before.
 She’s correct. Nationally, more than 96,000 Americans died of the coronavirus in April and May 2020, compared to a bit more than 70,000 Americans who died of drug overdoses in the higher of the two most recent years, 2017.
 We rate the statement True.
Amid ongoing concern about the new coronavirus, Vice President Mike Pence sought to assure Americans that their health insurance will cover the tests needed for diagnosis. 
 "With regard to the cost, let me be very clear: HHS has designated the coronavirus test as an essential health benefit. That means, by definition, it's covered in the private health insurance of every American, as well as covered by Medicare and Medicaid."
 That got us wondering about Pence’s assurance. Can he really claim that this designation means that all Americans with private health insurance, Medicare and Medicaid will be covered? And, is there a difference between coverage and cost?
 First, what are "essential benefits" and why does that matter?
 We reached out to the vice president’s office for details about his comments but got no reply.
 However, we also consulted with a range of experts, who helped us fill in the blanks.
 "There are many things wrong with the statement," said Christen Linke Young, a fellow with the USC-Brookings Schaeffer Initiative for Health Policy.
 
 For one thing, many Americans’ insurance policies don’t have to include coverage of essential health benefits, but more on that later. Still, as Young and other experts helped us piece together the details, it became increasingly clear that this testing will ultimately be covered by most Americans’ health insurance. But, it is not a simple process ― the actual cost to patients is the biggest uncertainty ― and making it happen will require steps not only by the federal government, as Pence suggested, but also by state regulators and private insurers.
 Let us start with the basics
 Under the Affordable Care Act, insurance plans covering individuals and small employers must provide coverage of 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), including prescription drugs, maternity care, hospital care and laboratory services.
 Lab services could include diagnostic tests for, say, influenza, strep throat or even coronavirus.
 But there isn’t a master list of all the tests covered.
 "They don’t say we only cover these particular diagnostic tests," said Young. "It’s a broad category of coverage."
 So HHS probably does not have to designate the COVID-19 test as an EHB for it to be covered. HHS did not respond to a question from us about whether it had, indeed, designated coronavirus testing as an EHB.
 States, because they regulate insurers within their borders, are also weighing in to add clarity. New York and California, for example, have ordered insurers to cover coronavirus testing and waive patient costs.
 It also should be noted that Pence’s invoking of EHBs relies on the ACA, even as the administration has been a constant and staunch opponent of the law.
 "The irony is great with this coming from an administration that has done everything it can to repeal the ACA, roll back essential health benefits and promote short-term plans that don’t cover much," said Sabrina Corlette, a research professor at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown University.
 But there’s another, bigger catch: EHBs apply only to a limited number of insurance plans ― those ACA-compliant plans purchased by individuals and small employers, which are defined as businesses with fewer than 50 employees. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The requirements don’t apply to many workplace plans (including those provided by large businesses and self-insured plans), even though most Americans ― about 157 million ― who have health insurance get it through their job.
 Most of these plans, though, do cover a wide range of benefits, including laboratory services, but they are not required by law to do so.
 Coronavirus testing would likely be lumped in, especially as "employers likewise very much want COVID under control and do not want it spreading through their workforces," said James Gelfand, senior vice president at the ERISA Industry Committee, which represents large employers.
 Private insurers are beginning to move in this direction, too. America’s Health Insurance Plans, the industry’s lobbying group, said in early March its members will cover diagnostic testing when ordered by a physician and will "take action to ease network, referral, and prior authorization requirements and/or waive patient cost sharing."
 And what about Americans who have purchased alternative forms of insurance?
 The ACA’s rules ― including those on essential benefits ― don’t apply to several types of insurance that the Trump administration has promoted, including short-term plans. Such plans have lower premiums than ACA plans, mainly because they don’t have to offer a wide range of benefits or meet other ACA rules. Consumers should "read the fine print to see what is in and what is out," said Corlette.
 Short-term plans also can cap annual treatment payment amounts, reject people with medical conditions ― or review their medical records after they make a claim to see if they had a preexisting condition that could disqualify them for coverage.
 Meanwhile, EHB rules don’t apply to Medicare. But that federal health insurance program for seniors and the disabled has made clear on its website that it will cover the test, saying "this test is covered when your doctor or other health care provider orders it, if you got the test on or after February 4, 2020."
 The agency that oversees Medicaid, the state-federal low-income health insurance program, issued a release saying that "testing and diagnostic services are commonly covered" and that lab tests are a "mandatory benefit."
 But does coverage mean the tests will be free or low-cost?
 No, coverage and cost are not the same.
 And that’s the key issue for policy and health experts.
 For those who have not yet hit their annual deductible, "the full cost of diagnostic tests will fall on those who get them," said Nicholas Bagley, a professor at University of Michigan Law School. "That will discourage some people from getting tested in the first place, which is a public health nightmare."
 Many private plans, both those offered by employers and those purchased by individuals, include deductibles that enrollees must meet before full coverage kicks in. Even after a deductible is satisfied, many plans also require some sort of copayment ― be it $10, $25 or more ― when seeing a doctor or going for a lab test. For emergency room visits, the cost sharing is higher.
 If insurers don’t waive cost sharing for the test, it could be an issue for some consumers. 
 Still, Bagley said, the federal government is limited in its ability to order insurers or employers to waive patient payments, at least in the short term. Longer term, federal officials could seek to declare the tests "preventive services," like mammograms or vaccines, which are free for insured patients. But that process would take more than a year to implement.
 In the meantime, it’s mainly up to insurers and employers to decide what to do. Cigna has announced it will waive patient costs for testing ― and others may soon as well, given AHIP’s statement. Another group, the Alliance of Community Health Plans, which represents nonprofit plans, didn’t specifically say its members would waive fees but pledged to "ensure affordability is not a barrier to the individuals who are recommended for testing by their doctor or a public health authority."
 Our ruling
 Pence said "HHS has designated the coronavirus test as an essential health benefit. That means, by definition, it's covered in the private health insurance of every American, as well as covered by Medicare and Medicaid."
 There are a number of moving parts to this statement, but it tends to leave out important details. For instance, many private and employer health plans have flexibility about what benefits they cover and what consumers will pay. In addition, coverage does not necessary mean low cost. 
 Bottom line: Pence's comment is an overstatement. It fails to acknowledge the need for action at the state level and from the private sector, too.
 For these reasons, we rate this claim as Half True.
In a wide-ranging executive order, President Donald Trump this month outlined some of the efforts he has made to affect health care since taking office.
 One involved uninsured people and the current pandemic. The administration, Trump said, set up a program to provide them "access to necessary COVID-19-related testing and treatment."
 Did it?
 We asked the White House for more specifics about the program Trump mentioned but did not get a reply.
 Nonetheless, experts said he is likely referring to reimbursement assistance to help pay the COVID testing and treatment costs of uninsured patients available through the Provider Relief Fund.
 This fund was established by Congress in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act to bolster eligible health care providers for lost revenue or expenses related to the pandemic.
 The Trump administration said this spring it would tap into the fund to reimburse providers who test and treat uninsured COVID patients; hence, the executive order’s reference to "coverage access." Here’s how it works: The assistance doesn’t go directly to patients. Instead, health care providers can apply for reimbursement of costs associated with testing or treating uninsured people for COVID-19. Patients must be uninsured and their primary diagnosis must be COVID-19. The program does not check immigration status in determining eligibility.
 Our experts acknowledged that the fund overall has helped providers by making money available, especially important since many physicians, hospitals and other health care facilities are struggling with reduced income as elective surgeries and visits have nose-dived during the pandemic. The relief fund pays providers at standard Medicare rates for testing or treating uninsured COVID patients.
 Still, many patients, and some providers, don’t know about the funding to reimburse for uninsured costs. And even providers who are aware of it don’t necessarily know how to use it. Hospitals and other providers are not required to publicize it. Additionally, eligibility restrictions can make it hard for some patients to qualify to have their bills paid.
 "It’s absolutely not broad protection or a guarantee of coverage," said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow with KFF. "People are uninsured. They remain uninsured. If they don’t know how to ask for this or the provider can’t figure out how to use it, [their bills] are uncollectable."
 What exactly is ‘coverage access’?
 Even before the pandemic, uninsured patients had a hard time finding medical care, often delaying needed medical services until a crisis sent them to the hospital. Federal law ensures that no one needing emergency care be turned away and must be treated until stabilized.
 The relief fund program came amid calls from health insurers, Democrats and others for the Trump administration to reopen enrollment in the Affordable Care Act through the federal marketplace, which operates in 38 states.
 Usually, the insurance sign-up period occurs each November. When the virus began causing concern in the U.S. in the spring, some of the 12 states (and the District of Columbia) that run their own marketplaces moved to reopen because of the pandemic, so uninsured residents could sign up.
 But the Trump administration decided not to reopen the federal marketplace. Uninsured people who want to enroll either have to wait to sign up starting in November for coverage next year or see if they qualify for a special enrollment because they have experienced one of several "qualifying life events." One such event is job loss that ends health coverage.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 That potentially left hospitals and other medical providers holding the bag for the uninsured who fall sick with COVID.
 Enter the relief fund.
 The Health Resources and Services Administration said the fund so far has handed out a little more than $1 billion for uninsured patient reimbursement, a substantial amount but well short of publicized estimates of what it will ultimately cost hospitals and medical providers to test and treat uninsured COVID patients.
 "We are appreciative" that Congress and the administration "did provide some coverage for the uninsured," said Molly Smith, vice president for coverage and state issues at the American Hospital Association. "But we don’t think it’s the best approach for covering the uninsured." Hospitals would have preferred something that "would have expanded comprehensive coverage."
 Parts of the program work well, she said, but "there are some pretty substantial flaws."
 Why ‘access’ becomes a slippery term
 When it comes to program eligibility, two main criteria present hurdles for patients: fitting the definition of "uninsured" and receiving a primary diagnosis of COVID-19.
 Failing either test could make a patient ineligible. In that case, the hospital or medical provider can either seek payment from the patient — or eat the cost.
 To qualify for coverage, the patient cannot have any kind of health insurance coverage, according to guidelines published online by HRSA.
 Even having very limited coverage — such as a program in Medicaid that covers only family planning services such as birth control — would disqualify a patient, said Smith. Another disqualification would be the purchase of one of the limited coverage plans touted by the administration that don’t cover all the same services an ACA plan would include.
 The second hurdle: COVID-19 must be the primary diagnosis.
 "If someone with a heart attack comes in and it turns out COVID is also involved — or could have even been the trigger," the provider might not be eligible for reimbursement, said Jack Hoadley, a research professor emeritus at Georgetown University.
 Another common example, Smith said, is a patient with COVID-19 who develops sepsis, a life-threatening blood infection. Under long-standing coding and billing rules, sepsis would be the primary diagnosis, making any coronavirus-related patient care ineligible under the provider relief program.
 Our ruling
 The Trump administration did implement a program to reimburse medical providers for testing and treatment of some uninsured patients, tapping into funding allocated by Congress.
 Whether — and to what extent — the measure improved "coverage access" to care is hard to determine. The fund has paid out more than $1 billion so far.
 The administration chose this route, which experts said was an incomplete fix, over following some states’ lead in allowing a special enrollment period on the federal marketplace, which would have enabled people without health insurance to buy more comprehensive coverage. Meanwhile, the program has not been publicized and has confusing eligibility rules — both of which have led to speculation that it is not being used as widely as possible.
 The administration’s program appears to provide narrow financial assistance for COVID-related health care costs. But patients who fall through the cracks may find themselves facing substantial bills.
 We rate this statement as Mostly True.
During a visit to a construction site near Chicago, President Joe Biden promoted his policies to increase vaccination rates, arguing that beating back the coronavirus is the best way to boost the nation’s economy.
 "My administration is now requiring federal workers to be vaccinated," Biden said on Oct. 7. "We’ve also required federal contractors to be vaccinated. ... We’re requiring active duty military to be vaccinated."
 Biden then addressed vaccine requirements for medical workers: "We’re making sure health care workers are vaccinated, because if you seek care at a health care facility, you should have the certainty that the people providing that care are protected from COVID and cannot spread it to you."
 Some critics of Biden suggested that he had left an inaccurate impression — that if you're vaccinated, you can't spread the virus.
 Those critics had a point: Biden did overstate the degree to which vaccination curbs an individual’s ability to spread the virus to someone else. (The White House did not respond to inquiries for this article.)
 In fact, this is the stated position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In a discussion of the more readily transmissible delta variant of the coronavirus published on Aug. 26, the CDC wrote that "fully vaccinated people with delta variant breakthrough infections can spread the virus to others." 
 Experts contacted by PolitiFact agreed. 
 Biden "should not be so firm" in his phrasing, said Tara C. Smith, a Kent State University epidemiologist. "Vaccination does significantly reduce transmission from vaccinated breakthrough cases but does not completely eliminate it."
 Babak Javid, a professor of medicine at the University of California-San Francisco, said there are "many examples of onward transmission from vaccines," even beyond the most well-known example, an outbreak in the summer of 2021 that included many vaccinated people in Provincetown, Mass.
 So Biden is exaggerating when he suggests that someone who is vaccinated "cannot spread" the virus. But scientists agree that vaccination does cut transmission of the coronavirus significantly, even for the delta variant.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For starters, vaccination makes it less likely that someone will be infected with the virus in the first place. But even beyond that, vaccinated people who do contract the virus have been found to be infectious for a shorter time than those who aren’t vaccinated. For instance, a study from Singapore found that virus levels dropped quickly after infection among people who had been vaccinated.
 "This makes sense, since the immune response from the vaccination is coming in to fight the virus," said Monica Gandhi, a professor of medicine at the University of California-San Francisco.
 And the shorter someone is at peak infectiousness, the less likely they are to transmit the virus to others.
 RELATED VIDEO
 
 
 Here are some studies that show a reduction in transmission by vaccinated individuals:
 • An Oxford University study of contract-tracing data from 100,000 initial cases in the United Kingdom found that vaccination reduced transmission of the delta variant, despite similar viral loads between vaccinated and unvaccinated subjects. Contacts who had received the Pfizer vaccine, which is also used in the United States, were 65% less likely to test positive than people who had not been vaccinated. The AstraZeneca vaccine, which is not approved for use in the United States, reduced positive tests by 36%. (The study did find that the effectiveness in preventing transmission waned with time.)
 • A study from Umeå University in Sweden found that people without immunity were at a significantly reduced risk of being infected if family members were vaccinated or had experienced a previous coronavirus infection. This reduction ranged from 45% to 97%, depending on how many other family members were infected. 
 • A study from the Netherlands looked at infections among more than 24,000 health care workers. It found that infectious virus shedding was lower among vaccinated individuals who had been infected than it was among those who were unvaccinated. 
 Our ruling
 Biden said that people who are vaccinated for the coronavirus "cannot spread it to you."
 That’s overstating the case. Multiple studies show that a vaccinated person is significantly less likely to pass the coronavirus to someone else than an unvaccinated person is, but the transmission risk is not reduced to zero.
 We rate the statement Half True.
As the United States reaches all-time highs in new coronavirus cases — exceeding 80,000 in a single day — posts circulating online claim "world renowned" experts now say that most everyone should go back to living their lives as normal.
 "BREAKING NEWS," one post on Facebook reads. "The world renowned experts in their fields, after a 4 day conference regarding COVID-19, declare that WE SHOULD ALL GO BACK TO LIVING NORMALLY, PRACTICING SIMPLE HYGIENE & STAYING HOME WHEN SICK (NO FACE MASKS OR SOCIAL DISTANCING) and only protect the most vulnerable populations with more protective measures!"
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 The social media post doesn’t provide the full picture. It’s accurate that three scientists authored a letter that endorses herd immunity and supports a completely reopened society for those with no underlying health conditions amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Since its publication in early October, however, the document has been widely criticized by scientists and denounced by top health officials and thousands of doctors around the world. 
 The Great Barrington Declaration
 The document was drawn up following a meeting hosted by the libertarian think-tank American Institute for Economic Research. Named the "Great Barrington Declaration" after the Massachusetts town in which it was drafted, the paper was signed by scientists and health experts across the world. But a British broadcast station found that some of those who signed the letter online used fake names, including "Dr. Person Fakename" and "Dr. Johnny Bananas." The signatures were later made private.
 The plan was put together by three scientists from prestigious universities: Dr. Sunetra Gupta of Oxford University, Dr. Jay Bhattacharya of Stanford University, and Martin Kulldorff of Harvard University.
 But none in the group have published any peer-reviewed studies about the coronavirus, and some have advocated for herd immunity over lockdowns for months, telling policymakers that the virus isn’t that deadly.
 The plan, which they describe as "focused protection," calls for only protecting "vulnerable" people and for otherwise healthy people to live life as normal, as if the virus doesn’t exist, thus opening up the avenue for them to get infected with COVID-19. It reads, in part: 
 "The most compassionate approach that balances the risks and benefits of reaching herd immunity, is to allow those who are at minimal risk of death to live their lives normally to build up immunity to the virus through natural infection, while better protecting those who are at highest risk...
 "Those who are not vulnerable should immediately be allowed to resume life as normal. Simple hygiene measures, such as hand washing and staying home when sick should be practiced by everyone to reduce the herd immunity threshold. Schools and universities should be open for in-person teaching. Extracurricular activities, such as sports, should be resumed. Young low-risk adults should work normally, rather than from home. Restaurants and other businesses should open. Arts, music, sport and other cultural activities should resume. People who are more at risk may participate if they wish, while society as a whole enjoys the protection conferred upon the vulnerable by those who have built up herd immunity."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The controversial idea falls in line with the Trump administration’s position on reopening the United States during the pandemic, and the authors discussed the strategy in a meeting with Alex Azar, secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, and Scott Atlas, a Stanford neuroradiologist on the White House coronavirus task force, Buzzfeed News reported. White House officials also embraced the paper.
 Health officials respond
 The document was quickly and emphatically rejected by the greater scientific and medical community, including top U.S. health officials, the World Health Organization and the United Kingdom government.
 Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, called the declaration "ridiculous" and "total nonsense" in an interview with ABC News: "If you talk to anybody who has any experience in epidemiology and infectious disease they will tell you that that is risky, and you will wind up with many more infections of vulnerable people, which will lead to hospitalizations and deaths. So I think we just gotta look that square in the eye and say it’s nonsense."
 "Never in the history of public health has herd immunity been used as a strategy for responding to an outbreak, let alone a pandemic. It is scientifically and ethically problematic," WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at a news conference on Oct. 12.
 Matt Hancock, the UK’s health secretary, attacked the document in Parliament on Oct. 13, saying that many infectious diseases never reach herd immunity, and called it a flawed goal without a vaccine. Hancock also took issue with the paper’s idea of separating the elderly and vulnerable.
 "That is simply not possible," Hancok said. "As the medical director of the NHS said yesterday, we cannot somehow fence off the elderly and the vulnerable from risk while everyone else returns to normal. It is neither conscionable nor practicable — not when so many people live in intergenerational homes, not when older people need carers who of course themselves live in the community, and not when young people can suffer the debilitating impact of long COVID. ...If we let this virus continue unchecked, the loss of life would be simply too great to contemplate." 
 Thousands of other experts have also spoken out against the declaration. 
 A counter-memo, first published in the Lancet medical journal and signed by a group of 80 researchers, called the idea "a dangerous fallacy unsupported by scientific evidence." More than 6,400 scientists, researchers and healthcare professionals have since signed the memo.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post says "world renowned experts in their fields" have determined that the vulnerable should still be protected amid COVID-19, but those without underlying medical conditions should immediately be allowed to resume life as normal.
 Three scientists authored a declaration that calls for what they termed "focused protection" — shielding the vulnerable while otherwise healthy people to return to schools, offices and restaurants.
 Readers who see the social media post and nothing else will be left with the wrong impression about the safety of such a plan. It was immediately denounced by top health officials and thousands of doctors and scientists around the world, who say that the plan is dangerous and nearly impossible to execute in a world where vulnerable populations cannot ethically live in isolation.
 The post is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate it Half True.
As President Donald Trump’s negotiators were working with congressional leaders to assemble a coronavirus economic relief package, the president’s re-election campaign didn’t shy away from blasting one key Democratic leader, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif.
 On March 24, Trump campaign manager Brad Parscale shared a video focused on the coronavirus bill Pelosi had released the day before. It named a half-dozen provisions in the Take Responsibility for Workers and Families Act that the Trump campaign considered outside the scope of the current crisis.
 On screen, the ad says:
 "Nancy Pelosi and the Democrats clog their coronavirus relief bill with leftist wishlist. Democrat bill includes: tax credits for solar and wind energy … emissions standards and carbon offset requirements for airlines … policing racial makeup of corporate boards … retirement plans for community newspaper employees … $300 million for PBS … climate change studies for civil aviation and aerospace industries. Democrats don’t care about your health or the economy. They only care about politics"
 Democratic officials acknowledge that most of those provisions are in the bill, which at the time the ad was launched was taking a back seat to negotiations over a Senate bill. However, one of the provisions cited by the Trump campaign’s ad is not in the bill.
 
 A still from a Trump campaign ad targeting House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's coronavirus relief bill.
 The airline provisions: carbon offsets, corporate board diversity, climate change study
 Pelosi’s bill seeks to shape the behavior of any airlines that accept federal assistance to the benefit of their workers, customers and the environment.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kevin McCarthy
 
 
 stated on November 18, 2021 in a House floor speech
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Never in American history has so much been spent at one time. Never in American history will so many taxes be raised and so much borrowing be needed to pay for this reckless spending.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Louis Jacobson • November 19, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carbon offsets are addressed in section 704 of the bill. Corporate board diversity, in the form of retrospective reporting requirements, is part of section 407, while the climate change study is in section 707.
 A statement provided by the Democratic leadership said that "the extreme impacts that COVID-19 has had on corporate operations, the workforce, the lack of adequate contingency plans designed to protect worker interests and needs, and the impact this has had on the national economy highlights the need to have worker interests represented on corporate boards."
 Retirement plans for community newspapers
 This language, in section 404, is largely drawn from H.R. 1916, a bill that has been introduced but not advanced. The bill would change rules for community newspapers’ defined-benefit pension plans.
 The Democratic leadership says this is part of an overall pension package to help cash flow for companies.
 $300 million for PBS
 This would be a supplemental appropriation for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which funds PBS and which is facing shortfalls due to the coronavirus, the Democratic leadership says.
 Tax credits for solar and wind energy
 This is the one provision cited by the ad that is not actually in the House bill, despite pressure from the industry to include it.
 Our ruling
 The campaign ad says that Pelosi’s coronavirus bill included provisions on "tax credits for solar and wind energy … emissions standards and carbon offset requirements for airlines … policing racial makeup of corporate boards … retirement plans for community newspaper employees … $300 million for PBS … climate change studies for civil aviation and aerospace industries."
 The ad is correct that five of those six provisions are in the House bill. The remaining provision, on tax credits for solar and wind, is not. We rate the statement Mostly True.
President Donald Trump bragged that his March 13, 2020, statements about coronavirus had record-breaking influence on the stock market.
 Wearing a baseball hat with "USA" emblazoned on the front, Trump told reporters gathered at the White House a day later on March 14, 2020:
 "I was honored to see that the stock market — you were mostly there with us — set a record in a short period of time, over a 45-minute period that we had the press conference yesterday in the Rose Garden. That was a record; all-time record. I think we should do one of them every day, perhaps. How about five times a day? We’ll do one five times a day. But that was something to watch and — I had no idea. We walked back, I said, ‘So, how did that work out?’ They said, ‘Sir, you just set a new record in the history of the stock market.’ So, that was pretty good."
 The market did make a record surge on March 13, 2020, and the surge accelerated during Trump’s news conference that afternoon. 
 But that record came a day after the steepest decline ever.
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average, the most popular measure of the stock market, gained 1,985 points on Friday, March 13. That was its biggest point gain ever, with the "late-day surge" coming "while Trump was speaking," the Associated Press reported. The business and financial news network CNBC and other news organizations reported the same.
 In his remarks, Trump declared the coronavirus pandemic a national emergency, announced greater availability of testing in the coming days and announced the purchase of oil for the strategic petroleum reserve — steps that may have helped lift the Dow.
 His Rose Garden news conference started at 3:30 p.m. EDT and lasted an hour and 11 minutes, including remarks given by members of Trump’s Coronavirus Task Force. At the start of the speech, the Dow was at 21,747.52. By the market’s close at 4 p.m., while Trump’s news conference was continuing, it was at 23,175.92, for a gain of 1,428 points over the course of the speech.
 That gain itself was larger than the previous record for the largest point gain in a day — 1,293.96 points on March 2, 2020.
 "Stocks rallied, shooting sharply upward in the last half-hour of trading as investors appeared to gain confidence that the Trump administration has a plan to combat the outbreak from both a health care and economic perspective," AP reported.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But that upward acceleration followed a record decline, as news organizations also reported.
 As Barron’s put it: "The Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeted 10% on Thursday, marking its biggest one-day percentage (and point) drop since the Black Monday stock market crash in 1987."
 The rally "only recovered most of the losses suffered a day earlier," MarketWatch reported, adding that the Dow is "in a bear market."
 It’s also worth noting that those gains were fleeting. The increases of March 13 were wiped out by the next trading day, Monday, March 16, when the Dow dropped like a rock and opened 2,240 points down at 20,935.70 and then fell another 248 points by the market’s close. Such sharp rises and declines are common during times of stress in the economy.
 "One good day was really more of a dead-cat bounce, as the market fell still further after that," Tulane University business professor Peter Ricchiuti told PolitiFact. "Also, the stock market is not the economy. It’s a measure of projected corporate profits. Very different things."
 Kathleen Day, lecturer at the Johns Hopkins Carey Business School and author of a book on financial crises, said in an interview: "The big picture here is the stock market is gyrating. It’s unstable because of the virus itself and because of the lack of leadership (from Trump). The market wouldn’t have gone up so much if it hadn’t gone down so much."
 The White House didn’t respond to our requests for information.
 Trump didn’t specify what type of record was set, but a point gain is one legitimate measure. At the same time, large point gains and declines are natural when the Dow is at a high number. The index was marching toward 30,000 just a few weeks earlier. Stock watchers pay more attention to percentage changes on a given day or over time as a sign of the market’s strength. On that score, the gain for the day of Trump’s news conference was the largest percentage increase since October 2008.
 Our ruling
 Trump said that "over a 45-minute period that we had the press conference" on the coronavirus on March 13, 2020, the stock market set "an all-time record."
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average registered its largest-ever point gain on March 13, with gains accelerating during Trump’s news conference. But that occurred one day after the Dow’s biggest point decline ever, and the gains were wiped out the next trading day. 
 Trump’s statement is partially accurate, but leaves out important details. We rate this Half True.
Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s stay-at-home orders prompted conservatives to organize protests, but Whitmer said she will base decisions on how and when to relax Michigan’s social distancing guidelines on facts and science.
 At a press conference April 15, Whitmer said that the protests where people gathered without masks in close proximity "may have just created a need to lengthen it, which is something that we’re trying to avoid at all costs."
 Whitmer said she is working with experts in health care and other sectors to create a data-driven approach to reopening the state. "I want to be very clear that our decision to re-engage sectors is going to be based on the best facts and the best science, and what facts and science have told us is that re-engaging our state too soon or too fast will lead to a second wave of COVID-19 in Michigan," she said. "During the flu pandemic of 1918, some cities lifted social distancing measures too fast, too soon, and created a second wave of pandemic."
 Whitmer said that as a result of lifting social distancing measures too fast in 1918, many cities had to revert to quarantines and "suffered a lot of additional deaths." 
 We will explain the source of her data, which comes from an academic paper in 2007. 
 Research about social distancing during the 1918 flu
 The influenza pandemic of 1918 spread worldwide and killed at least 50 million people, including about 675,000 in the United States. Since there was no vaccine for the virus and no antibiotics to treat secondary bacterial infections, control efforts were largely limited to social distancing and quarantines, which were applied unevenly.
 During her press conference, Whitmer pointed to a chart by National Geographic, which displayed the findings of a 2007 study about the death rates in 43 cities during the 1918 pandemic. The study was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association and written by researchers from the University of Michigan Medical School and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
 Two of the authors summarized their findings in the Washington Post in April.
 "The experience of 1918 also reminds us that early, layered (i.e., more than one at the same time) and lengthy mitigation measures are the best strategy. For social distancing to work, it must be sweeping and enforced across a wide swath of the community," wrote Howard Markel and J. Alexander Navarro.
 The researchers examined social distancing in 43 cities during about 24 weeks in 1918-19. Public gathering bans typically meant the closure of saloons, public entertainment venues and sporting events. Indoor gatherings were banned or moved outdoors. 
 Researchers found that cities that implemented social distancing in a timely and comprehensive manner and sustained those rules suffered the least.
 St. Louis, for example, implemented a relatively early, layered strategy that included school closures and the cancellation of public gatherings. It sustained those interventions for about 10 weeks and did not experience nearly as harmful an outbreak as 36 other communities. 
 Conversely, Philadelphia held a massive Liberty Bond Parade to bolster the World War I effort. That led to a spike of thousands of flu cases within days. In Atlanta, the mayor sided with the business community and ended closures after three weeks, despite objections from the board of health. The epidemic raged in Atlanta.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Researchers documented public pressure to end social distancing as soon as the flu seemed to peak and ebb. Cities then lifted the measures, and people lined up for movies and packed into dance halls and shopping districts.
 "The result? Cases and deaths resurged. Most cities closed their schools once again," the researchers wrote. 
 Researchers noted caveats including that there could be errors in the historical record and the difficulties in interpreting data from 90 years ago. 
 Navarro, one of the study authors, told PolitiFact that the study shows that communities must be very careful about removing social distancing restrictions too soon. Social distancing flattens the curve, but it doesn’t end the epidemic. It ends when a community reaches hard immunity through vaccine or antibody reaction from infection.
 A separate paper published in 2007 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences examined 17 U.S. cities during the flu pandemic. It found that cities in which interventions were implemented early had peak death rates about 50% lower than those that did not. It concluded that social distancing and other measures "can significantly reduce influenza transmission, but that viral spread will be renewed upon relaxation of such measures."
 What this means for easing social distancing now
 It’s tricky to compare lifting restrictions "too early" with "holding them for longer," said Marc Lipsitch, a Harvard epidemiologist and one of the co-authors of the National Academy of Sciences paper. In either case, there will be some amount of resurgence once social distancing is let up.
 A recent paper he co-authored in Science suggested that a single period of distancing could not permanently solve the problem; prolonged or intermittent social distancing may be necessary into 2022.
 "So overall, the problem is that it's not short vs. long, but single vs. repeated (or some other strategy such as a vaccine)," he told PolitiFact.
 On April 15, President Donald Trump said he thinks some states can open up before May 1. Many scientists have warned that ending the interventions prematurely will lead to more deaths.
 Dr Anthony Fauci, the country’s top infectious disease expert, told the Associated Press on April 14 that the U.S. doesn’t yet have the contact tracing and testing needed to reopen the economy. He said Trump’s goal was a "bit overly optimistic" for parts of the country. 
 "I’ll guarantee you, once you start pulling back there will be infections. It’s how you deal with the infections that’s going count," Fauci told the AP.
 Our ruling
 Whitmer said, "During the flu pandemic of 1918, some cities lifted social distancing measures too fast, too soon, and created a second wave of pandemic."
 Typically, when social distancing ends, there is a second wave. The goal is to make the second wave as small as possible. Whitmer pointed to research from the University of Michigan in 2007 that found after social distancing rules ended in many cities, cases and deaths surged. 
 We rate this statement Mostly True.
Last weekend, U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey recorded a message about how to stop the spread of the coronavirus and posted it on Twitter. His message was simple and direct – start wearing a homemade mask when you leave the house. 
 "My mask will keep someone else safe and their mask will keep me safe," said Toomey, a Republican from the Lehigh Valley. "I’m not suggesting this is any kind of guarantee. It probably doesn’t have tremendous value for the person wearing the mask but it probably does significantly reduce the risk that people could inadvertently transmit it."
 Since masks for health care workers are in such short supply, we wondered whether Toomey’s claim is true. 
 For weeks, public health officials advised healthy Americans not to wear masks. But on Friday, President Donald Trump announced that the guidance had changed. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is now urging everyone to wear homemade cloth masks when they leave the house, just as Toomey called for a week ago. He was the first member of Congress to advocate for the shift. 
 But even as Trump announced the new rules, he said he didn’t plan to follow them himself. 
 "It’s voluntary so you don’t have to do it," Trump said at Friday’s daily coronavirus briefing. "They suggest it for a period of time. I don’t think I’m going to be doing it."
 Trump said the guidance shifted because research indicates that people who are infected with the coronavirus but aren’t showing any symptoms can still transmit the disease. He also reiterated that wearing homemade masks is not a replacement for other strategies such as social distancing and hand-washing.
 "We want to make sure everybody understands it’s not a substitute for the presidential guidelines that have already gone out," Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said Thursday.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Toomey got another thing right. Homemade masks are significantly more effective at preventing asymptomatic carriers of the virus from accidentally spreading it than they are at shielding a healthy person from contracting it. And the efficacy of any homemade mask depends on how it’s made. 
 The most effective homemade masks are made of thick cloth and make a tight seal around the wearer’s face.
 "Given the current crisis, and lacking an alternative, many layers of densely woven fabric would be the most effective, because it allows for lots of voids in the layers where particles can be trapped," Richard Peltier, an assistant professor of environmental health sciences at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, told us by email. "The mask needs to seal as tightly as possible to the face to avoid leaks, though this may not be possible with different designs, fabrics, or face shapes. Thin or porous fabrics are the least likely to be effective."
 A study published in October 2010 tested how cloth masks and common fabrics fared when sprayed with aerosols at different speeds. All of the materials performed worse than hospital-grade N95 respirators. But some, such as cotton towels and scarves, were in the range of some surgical masks. The authors cautioned that fabric materials "show only marginal filtration performance against virus-size particles when sealed around the edges."
 Another study from 2013 found that cotton masks only perform about half as well as surgical masks and "should only be considered as a last resort to prevent droplet transmission from infected individuals." More recent research had similar results.
 So at best, using thick or layered fabric to make a homemade mask could be as effective as using some surgical masks. At worst, it prevents at least some of your respiratory droplets from spreading to others while in public.
 Under ideal circumstances, no face masks are intended to be worn for more than one encounter. That guidance also extends to homemade masks.
 "At the end of the day, these cloth masks should be treated as contaminated materials that you bring in to your home — they need to be laundered in hot soapy water, and you’d need to consider sanitizing in bleach or hydrogen peroxide regularly," Peltier said.
 Our ruling 
 Toomey’s claim that his homemade mask would keep someone else safe and that someone else’s homemade mask would keep him safe matches the latest guidance from the CDC. We rate this statement True.
President Donald Trump has received plenty of criticism for the timeline of his administration’s response to the coronavirus pandemic.
 Now a Facebook post making the rounds seeks to scrutinize Trump’s actions in comparison to health officials’ warnings about the virus. 
 The post says that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a warning about COVID-19 as early as Jan. 8, but that Trump continued to hold campaign rallies and play golf before he "admitted the coronavirus might be a problem" on March 13.
 The post lists specific dates, saying "Trump held campaign rallies on Jan 9, Jan 14, Jan 28, Jan 30, Feb 10, Feb 19, Feb 20, Feb 21, & Feb 28. He golfed on Jan 18, Jan 19, Feb 1, Feb 15, Mar 7, Mar 8."
 This post was flagged by Facebook as part of efforts to combat false news and information on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 We looked into the claim date by date and found that Trump did hold rallies and go golfing on those dates. But the CDC’s warning said the threat of the coronavirus to Americans was low, and Trump took action against the virus earlier than March 13.
 According to online archives of the events page on Trump’s website, rallies were held across the U.S. on the dates listed in the post, including the Feb. 28 rally in North Charleston, S.C., where he used the word "hoax" while talking about the coronavirus. 
 Trump also went golfing on the dates mentioned in the post. Social media posts and press reports in Palm Beach document visits the president made to his Florida golf course in the first three months of 2020.
 The dates when the CDC first warned the public about COVID-19 and when Trump "admitted the coronavirus might be a problem" are more ambiguous.
 On Jan. 8, the CDC announced in a health advisory that it was investigating a new coronavirus detected in Wuhan, China. The advisory stated that "no human-to-human transmission has been reported." As a precaution, it advised health officials to wear an "N95 disposable facepiece respirator" if they were treating a patient who had recently traveled to Wuhan and was experiencing respiratory problems. 
 The situation summary the CDC posted on Jan. 10 stressed that there were no deaths associated with the novel coronavirus at the time and that the health risk to the American public was low.
 On Feb. 1, the CDC updated its advisory and noted that there were seven cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. It detailed how doctors and caregivers should avoid being in close contact with patients who might have COVID-19, especially those who had traveled to China or had been in close contact with known cases.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Feb. 28 update from the CDC told doctors to assume that anyone with respiratory symptoms had COVID-19, even if they hadn’t had close contact with other patients or traveled to China recently.
 It’s hard to put a finger on when Trump "admitted the coronavirus might be a problem."
 
 RELATED: Timeline: How Donald Trump responded to the coronavirus pandemic
 
 On Feb. 27, Trump announced during a press conference that he was putting Vice President Mike Pence in charge of the Coronavirus Task Force. However, in the same conference, Trump told reporters that he didn’t think a widespread outbreak in the U.S. was inevitable, just that "there’s a chance it could get fairly substantially worse." 
 Trump gave an Oval Office address on March 11, the same day the WHO declared that COVID-19 was a pandemic, in which he banned travel from Europe for the next 30 days. He also reminded the public that on March 6 he had signed, and Congress had passed, "an $8.3 billion funding bill to help CDC and other government agencies fight the virus and support vaccines, treatments, and distribution of medical supplies."
 Trump declared a national emergency on March 13 during a press conference with his Coronavirus Task Force. This opened up $50 billion of funding that would be used to "fight against this disease." 
 
 
 Our ruling
 A recent Facebook post claimed that Trump was warned about COVID-19 on Jan. 8 but continued to hold campaign rallies and play golf until he "admitted the coronavirus might be a problem" on March 13.
 While the golf and rally dates are accurate, the dates of the CDC’s first warning and Trump’s response to the coronavirus aren’t as clear cut. 
 There was a health advisory issued Jan. 8, though the threat to the U.S. was undefined and person-to-person transmission wasn’t established yet. It’s harder to determine the date on which Trump admitted there was a problem, but he did take specific actions before March 13. Those actions included creating a task force, signing a bill for health research funding and banning travel from China and Europe.
 The claim is partially accurate but leaves out important context. We rate it Half True.
How well-paid is Dr. Gale Burstein, the health commissioner of Erie County, N.Y.? According to Erie County Comptroller Stefan Mychajliw, Burstein rivals Dr. Anthony Fauci, the long-tenured federal official who is playing a key role combating the coronavirus.
 In 2020, Burstein’s compensation, when factoring in fringe benefits, reached $532,418, based on a new report produced by Mychajliw’s office.
 "I think a lot of people are going to be very angry that the health commissioner makes more than the governor, the vice president of the United States, and has a salary that is comparable to Dr. Anthony Fauci," Mychajliw said, according to the Buffalo News.
 Could a county-wide official really be out-earning such lofty officials? We took a closer look.
 Calculating Burstein’s income
 Government administrators generally do not receive overtime pay. In a normal, pandemic-free year, Burstein would have made $202,312 in base salary, and a total of $304,985 when benefits are included.
 However, starting in 2020, Erie County Executive Mark C. Poloncarz allowed all non-union, managerial, confidential employees to accept overtime pay for their work related to the coronavirus, the Buffalo News reported.
 The report found that during 2020, Burstein collected $183,414 for 1,266 hours of overtime work and $44,019 in fringe benefits on this overtime, not including health insurance. This made her the largest single recipient of taxpayer-funded overtime in Erie County, which includes Buffalo.
 In a statement, Erie County executive Mark C. Poloncarz verified Burstein’s earnings and added that Burstein is "performing two full-time jobs."
 Mychajliw said that including Burstein’s overtime pay, her 2020 salary places her among the highest paid officials not just in the state but the federal government as well.
 How does her salary compare?
 Jessica O’Neil, Mychajliw’s associate deputy comptroller and chief of staff, directed PolitiFact reporters to the Erie County budget and several articles showing the salary of top government officials.
 For the governor of New York, O’Neil cited an article in the Rochester Democrat and Chronicle that said New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo's annual salary is set to rise to $250,000 in 2021. However, Cuomo chose to defer his scheduled $25,000 pay raise and asked other statewide officials to do the same, citing economic hardships.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cuomo had been set to see his annual salary increase from $225,000 to $250,000 on Jan. 1 as part of a three-year pay schedule approved by state lawmakers in 2019. This deferral will ultimately mean Cuomo will make the same salary — $225,000 — in 2021 as he did in 2020.
 Former Vice President Mike Pence earned $230,700 in 2019, and that was set to increase to $235,100 in 2020 as a result of the expiration of a pay freeze.
 Finally, Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and chief medical advisor to the president, made $417,608 in wages 2019, which is the latest year in which federal salaries were available via the Freedom of Information Act.
 So Burstein’s total salary plus overtime in 2020 was $385,726, which easily beats the number for Cuomo and Pence. Once benefits are added in, her total compensation package of $532,418 beats Fauci as well.
 The caveat is that Pence and Cuomo, and possibly Fauci, receive perks that are difficult to value, and which may leave Burstein’s compensation in the dust.
 The vice president lived rent-free in a 9,150-square-foot Victorian mansion at Number One Observatory Circle, plus access to Air Force Two, a large security detail, and free food prepared by the executive chef and executive pastry chef at the White House, among several other benefits.
 Meanwhile, Cuomo gets the benefit of living arrangements at the New York State Executive Mansion and transportation via taxpayer funded planes and helicopters.
 Finally, it’s worth noting that Burstein’s income will decrease when and if the special pandemic compensation rules are rolled back.
 Our ruling
 Mychajliw said, "I think a lot of people are going to be very angry that the health commissioner makes more than the governor, the vice president of the United States, and has a salary that is comparable to Dr. Anthony Fauci."
 Burstein is benefitting from a rule that allows her to collect overtime, and she’s working more hours because of the pandemic. So Burstein’s salary and overtime alone exceeded the easily classifiable compensation for Cuomo and Pence, and when benefits are added in, she beats Fauci as well.
 However, Cuomo and Pence receive housing, transportation, and security benefits that are large but hard to quantify, and if these benefits are added into the calculation, they likely exceed what Burstein received.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
The coronavirus pandemic has governors grappling with the implications of holding primary elections even as some are insisting everyone stay at home until the public health crisis subsides.
 Of 23 states that have not yet held primaries, at least eight are now postponed, according to news reports.
 Illinois was one of three states that allowed voting to continue as scheduled on March 17, even after Gov. J.B. Pritzker closed schools, barred restaurants from serving dine-in customers and prohibited mass gatherings. Ohio, which was also scheduled to vote that day, shuttered polling places hours before they were set to open by declaring a public health emergency.
 Following Ohio’s 11th-hour move, Pritzker responded to criticism from Chicago’s city election board over why he did not act to postpone in-person voting in Illinois.
 At an Election Day news conference, Pritzker said the city’s board had asked him a week before "to do something that is unquestionably not within my legal authority."
 "They wanted me unilaterally to cancel in-person voting on March 17, convert Illinois to an all-vote-by-mail state, and extend vote by mail to May 12," Pritzker continued. "They could not even begin to explain the legal basis for their request."
 It’s impossible to say what would have happened had Pritzker’s administration forced a delay like Ohio’s, so calling it "unquestionable" is a bit of an exaggeration. But experts told us the governor’s on firm legal footing to claim he cannot — on his own — interfere with the democratic process.
 The limits of emergency powers
 During a state of emergency, which Pritzker declared earlier this month, public officials have broad authority to make drastic changes that may alter people’s daily lives and undercut businesses’ ability to operate.
 For example, Illinois’ Emergency Management Agency Act allows the governor to control the movement of people within a "disaster area," which in this case covers the entire state. It also permits him to seize property and suspend the sale of items such as alcohol or firearms. But it says nothing about postponing elections.
 In Ohio, Gov. Mike DeWine acknowledged he also lacked the authority to delay an election, according to the Columbus Dispatch. So he backed an attempt to get a court to change the date. When a judge denied that request, his public health director ordered all polling places closed. That action prompted a legal challenge, but Ohio’s supreme court dismissed it, declining to stop the state from shuttering the polls.
 Experts told us Pritzker’s administration may have been able to try something similar, potentially forcing the Illinois General Assembly to sort out a new date, as Ohio’s is now doing. But the experts warned that doing so could have set a troubling precedent for future elections.
 "You can say that even though the motivations here (in Ohio’s case) were completely pure and even though the decision here was completely reasonable, this is a dynamic that is not particularly healthy to have a situation where a person who is elected himself is deciding not to hold elections," said Nadav Shoked, a local government expert at Northwestern University’s law school.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indeed, Pritzker made a similar point during his press conference, warning "it is exactly in times like these when the constitutional boundaries of our democracy should be respected above all else."
 When we asked his office why the governor’s administration had not tried to close polls like Ohio’s did, spokeswoman Jordan Abudayyeh responded in an email that "breaking the law and then hoping the Supreme Court agrees with you isn’t how this administration prefers governing."
 A matter for the General Assembly
 So who can set a new election date or shift voting entirely to mail-in ballots in Illinois?
 Abudayyeh told us state lawmakers would have to pass legislation in order to make that happen. The legislature was not in session the week before the election.
 The state’s election board also said it could not act unilaterally, noting in a March 16 press release that moving the election would require either a court order or legislative action.
 "The Election Code is silent on the issue of canceling or postponing an election," spokesman Matt Dietrich told us in an email. "It would require the General Assembly amending the Election Code to give us (or some other official or entity) such authority."
 Dietrich said the same goes for mandating election authorities send mail-in ballots to voters.
 Experts said it stands to reason that state lawmakers must take action in order to alter how elections are conducted.
 "Who represents the people of the state? It’s the state legislature," said Jaime Dominguez, an urban politics expert at Northwestern University. "Voters are indirectly involved through their representative in the legislature."
 Our ruling
 Pritzker said it was "unquestionably" not within his "legal authority" to postpone Illinois’ primary election by changing the date or shifting the election to vote-by-mail.
 While there are too many hypotheticals to be certain Pritzker’s administration could not have delayed the election in any way, experts told us the governor spoke correctly in describing the limits of his powers under state law.
 We rate his claim Mostly True.
 
 MOSTLY TRUE — The statement is accurate but needs clarification or additional information.
 Click here for more on the six PolitiFact ratings and how we select facts to check.
During a March coronavirus briefing, Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick said the state has one of the lowest coronavirus death rates in the country — a trend he said he hopes will continue through April.
 "If you look at the death rate in Texas, per capita of 29 million people, we're one of the lowest in the country," he said. "But we need to continue that for the rest of April. And even be better at that."
 The first issue here is that Patrick is conflating two calculations in his statement: the death rate for the coronavirus and the number of coronavirus deaths per capita in Texas.
 The death rate of a particular illness or disease is calculated by dividing the number of fatalities by the number of confirmed cases of the illness. A geography’s total population isn’t a factor.
 It is possible to look at the number of coronavirus deaths per capita, but it says less about the danger posed by the virus than the death rate. To give Patrick a fair shake, we’ll take a look at both of these figures and how Texas compares to other states. Patrick did not return a request for comment seeking clarification on his statement.
 "The death rate is generally a function of the number of people infected," said Dr. Myron Cohen, director of the Institute for Global Health and Infectious Diseases at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, in an email. "We are often unsure of this because this depends on sampling, and the tests deployed."
 For this reason, we’ll also look at the number of tests administered by each state. As more tests are administered and more cases are identified, the death rate for the virus will change.
 Given that the number of cases and fatalities is constantly changing, this fact-check will use data from March 31 — the day Patrick made his statement.
 Along these lines, it is important to remember that the death rate at this point in time is just a snapshot.
 "Case fatality rates are not constant. They can change considerably during an epidemic if, for example, it is discovered that there are many more milder cases than originally thought," according to a statement from the World Health Organization to PolitiFact at the end of March.
 The WHO also noted that the rate may vary across different geographies due to "demographic factors, for example differences in the age structure of the population."
 End of March numbers
 At the time of Patrick’s remarks, there were 3,266 confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Texas and 41 related deaths reported by state health authorities. This puts the approximate death rate for the virus at 1.26%, meaning 1.26% of people who tested positive for the virus died.
 Looking at all 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, Texas is among the areas with the lowest coronavirus death rate. Eleven states had a lower death rate when Patrick made his statement, including several with just one death: Wisconsin (1.18%), Missouri (1.06%), Tennessee (1.03%), South Dakota (0.93%), New Hampshire, (0.82%), West Virginia (0.62%), Utah (0.56%), North Carolina (0.53%), Hawaii (0.47%) and Wyoming, which had reported zero coronavirus deaths on the last day of March.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "It appears that Texas is among the states with low coronavirus deaths, but that is still true of large portions of the U.S. at this point," said Dr. Dhitinut Ratnapradipa, an environmental health professor at Sam Houston State University.
 At the time of Patrick’s claim, 29 states had a death rate of less than 2%.
 The state with the highest death rate on March 31 was Louisiana, with about 5,237 confirmed coronavirus cases and 239 deaths, a rate of 4.56%.
 Patrick’s statement also referenced deaths "per capita of 29 million people" in Texas.
 Texas is among the states with the fewest deaths per capita, based on March 31 coronavirus data and 2018 1-year population estimates from the Census Bureau’s American Communities Survey.
 When Patrick spoke, there had been fewer than one coronavirus death for every 100,000 people in Texas. The state with the most deaths per capita at the time was New York, with about eight deaths per 100,000 people.
 But Texas is also among the states that have administered the fewest number of coronavirus tests per capita.
 At the time of Patrick’s statement, Texas had administered 42,992 coronavirus tests — about 150 per 100,000 people. New York had administered about 1,050 tests per 100,000 people, or 205,186 tests in total.
 "The number of confirmed cases is directly related to testing," Ratnapradipa said in an email. "There is likely widespread community infection of people with no or mild symptoms who are not being tested. This means that we cannot accurately calculate a COVID-19 fatality rate."
 Cohen said it is important to remember that the current pandemic is "dynamic and growing, worldwide" and that declaring any kind of victory over the virus "is probably a bad idea at this point in time for most places on the planet."
 Since Patrick made this claim, the number of coronavirus-related deaths in the state has almost doubled, the state confirmed more than 1,000 additional cases and administered more than 10,000 additional tests.
 Our ruling
 Patrick said looking at the coronavirus "death rate in Texas, per capita of 29 million people, we're one of the lowest in the country."
 Patrick’s statement equates the death rate for coronavirus and the number of coronavirus deaths per capita in Texas, two different calculations.
 It is true that, at the time of Patrick’s statement, Texas was among the states with the lowest coronavirus death rate (and those with lowest number of deaths per capita) — but not by much. There were 29 states with a death rate of less than 2%.
 Experts cautioned that the actual coronavirus death rate cannot be accurately calculated until more people have been tested — and Texas is among the states with the lowest number of tests administered per capita.
 Patrick’s comparison is accurate based on the information available at the time of his statement, but his claim needs clarification and is missing important context about testing. We rate it Mostly True.
The coronavirus is now a pandemic, so far infecting nearly 120,000 people worldwide and killing more than 4,000. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have recommended that travelers avoid visiting Italy, among several other countries, unless it's absolutely necessary. 
 Italy, meanwhile, is taking its own precautions as COVID-19 spreads widely there. 
 A recent blog post claims those precautions include putting the entire country "into quarantine."
 "Italian prime minister has announced that the entire country goes into quarantine, as part of emergency measures aimed at halting the spread of the coronavirus," the undated post says. "The government’s extraordinary measures, announced at Palazzo Chigi late on 9 March, comes amid a worsening of the coronavirus outbreak. The new stringent measures, covering the entire country, and would take effect tomorrow morning."
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 But this post is essentially true: On March 9, Italian Prime Minister declared all of Italy a "red zone," which means people should stay home except for work and emergencies, according to NPR. The emergency quarantine measure had already been in place in northern Italy, where most of the COVID-19 cases are.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Italians must now also seek permission for essential travel, according to the BBC — and permission will only be granted for people with valid work or family reasons that can’t be postponed. People are forbidden from gathering in public and all sporting events are suspended. Schools and universities are closed until April 3. 
 There are other rules that indicate the nation is allowing some movement, however restricted, including a 6 p.m. curfew on bars and restaurants, a ban on jail visits, and an embargo on unnecessary shopping. Shopping centers, except for pharmacies and food markets, must close on weekends, according to ABC News. People are being asked to stand at least a meter apart from one another in supermarket lines.
 But as the New York Times reports, the exact restrictions of the quarantine aren’t clear to some Italians. 
 "We are hearing too many things and people don’t really get what’s going on," the newspaper quoted one woman as saying. She said she thought it was fine to take a walk around Milan, where she lives, but said the government’s explanations "aren’t clear at all."
 It’s worth noting that the word "quarantine" also has several definitions. According to Merriam Webster, it can mean "a state of forced isolation." Clearly not everyone in the country is being forced into isolation. But it can also mean "a restraint upon the activities or communication of persons or transport of goods designed to prevent the spread of disease or pests," a definition that fits what we are seeing in Italy. The country’s lockdown also seems well within the definition of quarantine used by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: "to separate and restrict the movement of well persons who may have been exposed to a communicable disease to see if they become ill." 
 We rate this post True.
As the number of coronavirus deaths neared 100,000, President Donald Trump struck an optimistic note about the state of the pandemic. 
 "Cases, numbers and deaths are going down all over the Country!" Trump tweeted May 24.
 Broadly, Trump has a point that the known spread of the virus has slowed in much of the United States. That said, the virus does continue to spread in some places, even if its rate of spread has declined from its level a few weeks ago.
 Let’s start with the big picture.
 Coronavirus deaths shot up quickly in March, peaked in April, and have been falling, though fairly slowly, in May. (The trend line in the following charts is jagged because the daily numbers for both measures tend to be smaller on the weekends before catching up early in the week.)
 
 
 The same pattern can be found in data for the daily increases in positive coronavirus tests nationally:
 
 
 In other words, the pandemic is easing, but not disappearing. The velocity of the spread is slowing, but it hasn’t stopped. The number of cases continues to grow.
 And the national picture hides substantial variation within states.
 "The U.S. is a patchwork of local epidemics right now, and looking at an overall national trend will mask sub-national trends," said Joshua Michaud, associate director for global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation. "Some places have seen significant declines in case numbers and shrinking epidemics. Some places have not yet seen significant numbers of cases at all. Still other places see ongoing transmission and, in certain locations, epidemics that are growing, albeit slowly."
 Let’s look at a few states where the daily number of new cases has declined steadily. Here is the data for New York and New Jersey. 
 
 
 And New York and New Jersey aren’t the only states that have seen clear declines. Using the Kaiser Family Foundation’s data tracker, we found several other states that saw a distinct pattern of declining cases over time: Colorado, Connecticut, Kansas, Massachusetts, Michigan, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island. (You can see the patterns most clearly if you visit Kaiser’s data page, click on "daily trends," and select "seven-day rolling average change in cases" for each of these states.)
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By the same token, other states have seen distinct increases over time, something that undercuts Trump’s argument. For instance, here’s a chart showing the daily increase in cases in Alabama, North Carolina, and Virginia:
 
 
 Using Kaiser’s data tracker, we found several other states that had a distinct pattern of rising cases over time: Arkansas, California, Maine, West Virginia and Wisconsin.
 And if you drill down beyond the state level, there are localities where coronavirus continues to spread quickly. These "hot spots" include counties like Trousdale and Lake, Tenn.; Dakota and Colfax, Neb.; Lincoln, Ark.; Nobles, Minn.; and Ford, Kan., according to New York Times calculations. Often, hot spots have meatpacking plants or prisons where the coronavirus spreads easily.
 Overall, death rates are declining in large cities and their suburbs, but have leveled off at a high level in medium-sized cities, small cities, towns, and rural areas, according to a data analysis by the Washington Post.
 Brooke Nichols, an assistant professor in Boston University’s department of global health, noted that the sharp decline in cases in New York City has driven the decline nationally, and that separating out the rest of the country shows only a very small decrease:
 
 
 Infection counts are subject to external factors, particularly the number of tests conducted. The more you test, the more infections you’ll find.
 "Looking at case counts alone can be misleading if you want to know whether local epidemics are getting better," said Forrest W. Crawford, a Yale University biostatistician.
 Still, data from the New York Times show that all states are making progress in at least one regard: a slower increase in infections than earlier in the epidemic. 
 "The lockdowns and social distancing did work to slow growth, but not completely extinguish it," said Tara C. Smith, a professor of epidemiology at Kent State University.
 Ultimately, the data is varied enough that observers can choose to look at the glass as either half full or half empty.
 "People who want to argue that things are getting better focus on slowing rates of growth," Crawford said, while those who argue that things are getting worse focus on declining case counts. 
 Our ruling
 Trump said, "Cases, numbers and deaths (of COVID-19) are going down all over the Country!"
 In general, the daily number of new infections and deaths is going down nationally, and in many states. However, a significant minority of states are seeing the number of new, daily infections rise, and some counties are "hot spots" with rapid spread.
 This suggests a patchwork pattern with generally slower spread than earlier in the pandemic.
 We rate the statement Half True.
As the coronavirus spreads across the country, officials are taking increasing notice of patterns of infections and deaths among people of different races. 
 In some states, provisional data through April 21 collected by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed disproportionately high rates of death from coronavirus among African Americans in Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, New York, and Wisconsin. Experts have suggested that a variety of factors may be responsible, including disparities in income and health insurance and a higher rate of pre-existing conditions.
 The question of racial disparities in coronavirus impact came up during an April 8 news conference with Lovely Warren, the mayor of Rochester, N.Y. 
 Warren opened the press conference by saying, "I'm going to answer some questions you have regarding disparities across the country happening in the African American community as it pertains to the coronavirus and the number of deaths and the number of people being diagnosed with it."
 A reporter asked, "What are we seeing locally here in Rochester? How badly is Rochester being impacted, especially the minority population?"
 Warren responded, "We are not seeing, at a high rate, that level of disparity right now," Warren said. "We do believe if we do not change the social distancing, if we do not stay at home, we will see the level of disparity that we see across the country. … Today we are basically on par, a little bit up, from the population numbers, but we don’t see that disparity as much here in Monroe County as we’re seeing across the country."
 However, the disparities were already evident on the day Warren held the press conference.
 On the same day as the press conference, the Monroe County Department of Health released the racial and ethnic breakdown of coronavirus hospitalizations in the county, both in non-intensive care units and ICUs, as well as deaths from the virus.
 Here’s a summary of that data:
 
 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The health department data shows that for African Americans, the percentage of deaths from coronavirus was slightly higher than their share of the population -- African American residents accounted for 18.2% of deaths, compared to 16.2% of the county’s overall population. That was in line with Warren’s comment.
 However, the hospitalization rates for African Americans in the county were significantly higher. African Americans accounted for 27.9% of the non-ICU hospitalizations in the county and 53.8% of ICU hospitalizations.
 Meanwhile, non-ICU hospitalizations were disproportionately high for Hispanics -- 18.6% of such hospitalizations, compared to an overall 9% share of the population.
 Warren did acknowledge this fact in passing later in her press conference, saying, "What we do know is that people in the ICU, people of color, are in the ICU at a higher rate than other folks." However, on multiple occasions during the press conference she referred to the disparities as minor. 
 Justin Roj, the mayor’s director of communications and special events, said Warren stands by her statement.
 A footnote: Subsequent data has shown that the racial disparity has grown. Here’s a look at the data through April 17:
 
 
 The data shows that through April 17, African American hospitalization rates had grown to 67% of ICU hospitalizations and 39% of non-ICU hospitalization rates. And the share of deaths represented by African Americans rose to 24%, which exceeds African Americans’ 16% share of the county’s population.
 Meanwhile, Hispanics have accounted for 22% of ICU hospitalizations, which is more than double their 9% of the population.
 Our ruling 
 Referring to racial comparisons on coronavirus statistics in Monroe County, N.Y., Warren said the impact on minorities is "basically on par, a little bit up, from the population numbers," meaning that "we don’t see that disparity as much here."
 That was essentially accurate when looking at the share of deaths from the coronavirus. But at the time of her comment, African Americans accounted for a significantly higher share of ICU and non-ICU hospitalizations in the county, and the same was the case for Hispanics and non-ICU hospitalizations.
 The statement is partially accurate but needs additional information, so we rate it Half True.
Pushing back against a lawsuit seeking to block his "Safer at Home" extension, Gov. Tony Evers laid out his case for isolation measures in Wisconsin.
 He said striking down the order would "cripple our ability to respond to the pandemic." Places without such measures, he said, have yielded "reports of doctors rationing ventilators and having to choose which patients will live or die" and "reports of needing refrigeration trucks for the deceased."
 And he made a bold claim about the impact his shelter-in-place order has had in Wisconsin.
 "It's working," Evers wrote in an April 21, 2020, Facebook post. "We have flattened the curve here in Wisconsin and have prevented the death of at least 300 Wisconsinites, and perhaps as many as 1,400 lives."
 Disease experts have been clear that social distancing can save lives, but is Evers right about saving at least 300 lives?
 We checked it out.
 A hypothetical future
 We’ll start out with the obvious: There’s no way for Evers to know this for sure. He is referring to a hypothetical scenario in which actions taken to this point never occurred. 
 But this is a standard type of statement in disease management and other fields that use predictive models — comparing initial projections with actual observations later.
 "It’s quite common to project with a model sort of what would be expected in epidemiology," said Patrick Remington, a former CDC epidemiologist and director of the Preventive Medicine Residency Program at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. "What better way to predict than … to say, particularly early in an epidemic, what if we did nothing? The early transmission velocity in an epidemic, what if that were to continue throughout the course of the epidemic?"
 We should also note this language is in line with claims from the other side of the aisle. 
 President Donald Trump asserted in an April 16, 2020, news conference, "Our experts and scientists report that our strategy to slow the spread has saved hundreds of thousands of lives."
 What the Wisconsin models said
 The models used to project the number of cases and deaths from COVID-19 are constantly evolving, tweaked to factor in the most up to date trends, new information about the virus and changes in government policies and society’s response to them. The models get better as more data on what is happening is added, which is why the wild swings in projected cases and deaths from early models have leveled out now.
 Evers is comparing the number of deaths we’ve seen so far to what the earliest version of those models said would happen in Wisconsin.
 So what did they say?
 Evers spokeswoman Melissa Baldauff said his numbers were based on a model created by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A version of that released March 18, 2020 projected between 440 and 1,500 deaths in Wisconsin by April 8. The actual death toll on April 8 was 99. Some quick subtraction shows that is in line with Evers’ claim.
 "While early models of the virus’s spread are less reliable the further out they project, those models showed that, by April 8, Wisconsin would have seen 22,000 cases which would have resulted in 440-1,500 deaths," Julie Willems Van Dijk, deputy DHS secretary, said in an affidavit filed in opposition to the Republican lawsuit. "Therefore, we estimate that the First Safer at Home order saved between 300 and 1,400 lives by April 8th."
 Evers’ claim also lines up with early projections from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, a model that has been widely used by the government and public alike throughout the pandemic.
 On March 25 it projected 853 deaths in Wisconsin over the following four months. Now that model projects less than half that number.
 Another model, detailed in an April 24 report from Johns Hopkins University, said their simulations showed about three times as many deaths in Wisconsin by May 1 if "Safer at Home" had not been in place.
 As of April 30, 316 people had died in Wisconsin of COVID-19, DHS reports.
 Ajay Sethi, associate professor of population health sciences at the UW-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, said the range of lives saved Evers cited is "consistent with near-term forecasts I had seen."
 Remington agreed those figures are "absolutely within the range of what I’d expect," noting that Evers was wise to cite it as a range since it is an estimate and based on many factors.
 Crediting Evers
 One key factor here is the matter of credit.
 Just as the number of deaths is an estimate, so is figuring out how many of those lives saved were due specifically to "Safer at Home."
 "You can’t tease out the effect of that order from the daily White House briefings to all the stuff on social media to late night comedy shows," Remington said. "But you can say the result of all this public education is a change in our behavior."
 "Safer at Home" was the cornerstone of the Wisconsin response to coronavirus, though, so it’s certainly fair to credit it with a large share of the change in behavior here.
 "Without social distancing the virus would have continued to spread like wildfire," Sethi said.
 Our ruling
 Evers said his "Safer at Home" plan "prevented the death of at least 300 Wisconsinites, and perhaps as many as 1400 lives."
 This claim lines up with projections made by DHS, and experts say it’s in line with what other models projected as well. And Evers was smart to cite a wide range of possible outcomes, since we have no way of knowing precisely how this theoretical future would have played out.
 But any claim like this is based on a hypothetical scenario of how COVID-19 might have progressed in Wisconsin without the array of government limitations and changes in personal behavior we’ve seen in recent months. 
 And Evers stated this as a knowable fact rather than an estimate.
 With that missing context in mind, we rate this Mostly True.
Sen. Doug Jones, an Alabama Democrat who could face an uphill battle for re-election against Republican Tommy Tuberville, is attacking the former college football coach as something of a know-nothing on a critical subject: the federal response to the coronavirus pandemic.
 Jones made the attack on Tuberville in an Aug. 7 interview with Alabama Public Television host Don Dailey. 
 "He’s never been challenged on the issues, Don, and that’s the key," Jones said. "In April, he said on a radio show, when asked how he would handle the pandemic, he said he didn’t have a clue. Just right after the Republican nomination, he was asked the same question and he still said he didn’t have a clue."
 Jones also posted that clip from the "Capitol Journal" show on Facebook.
 Tuberville did say, in March, he "didn’t have a clue" on how to handle COVID-19 and in July said, "I don’t know which way you go." He has not laid out a plan for addressing the virus, though he has taken some positions on pandemic-related shutdowns and federal emergency aid.
 Tuberville’s campaign referred us to statements he has made in support of sending children back to school and restarting sports.
 A pivotal Senate race
 Tuberville, who had his greatest success as a football coach at Auburn University in Alabama, is making his first run for public office. He’s challenging Jones, who won a special election in December 2017 for the seat vacated by Republican Jeff Sessions, who became President Donald Trump’s first attorney general.
 The outcome of their Nov. 3 race could help determine whether Republicans keep a majority in the Senate, where they now control 53 seats. As of Aug. 17, the race is rated as "lean Republican" by the Cook Political Report.
 Jones’ evidence
 To back Jones’ attack, his campaign cited two Tuberville radio interviews.
 1. "Wouldn’t have a clue": Birmingham talk show co-host Matt Murphy asked Tuberville on March 19 if he agreed with the Trump administration on sending stimulus checks to people in response to the coronavirus pandemic. 
 "I’d have to look at it, Matt, because we don’t have the money, number one," Tuberville said, adding that it was unknown how many people would need the financial assistance.
 "The unknown is what is so tough here and that's the reason, the decision's going to have to be made from just a group of people in the White House and hopefully a few people, people in the Senate and the House of making the decision for the people and take politics out of it."
 He added: 
 "The decision is basically two words. You’re either going to pay or you’re going to send people back to work, at the end of the day. And they know a lot more about the situation than we do. They’ve got all the facts and figures and they’re working around the clock. So, to make a decision from my standpoint, I wouldn’t have a clue. It’d be like putting a game plan together and not be around it and all of a sudden trying to call plays, not knowing what the defense does. You’ve got to know everything around you."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. "Don’t know which way you go": On July 17, Rick Burgess, co-host of a Birmingham show, raised COVID-19 and asked: "What would be your approach to what’s going on?"
 After saying that initially the pandemic might have been "overblown to a point," and then making a reference to how Sweden responded, Tuberville replied:
 "The thing you’ve got to remember — five, eight years ago, we couldn’t have done that; technology-wise, we couldn’t have shut the country down like we did. We didn’t have the Zooms and all those things that we could continue to work, and we would have just fought through it. I think that technology gives us an easier out in terms of saying, Shut everybody down."
 He added: "I tell you, we’ve got to work through this. But I tell you, it’s an unseen virus. We know very little about it. We’re learning more about it. The previous administration just left us without any kind of medical supplies. President Trump’s had to dig deep. And boy, he’s taken a lot of hits. But I don’t know which way you go, at the end of the day, whether you’re right or wrong, or anything that you do with this. Because, we’ve got to just fight through it ourselves and mentally fight back."
 Other Tuberville statements
 Tuberville has not laid out a plan for addressing COVID-19 and has sometimes downplayed its seriousness. He highlights 10 issues on his campaign website, including health care, but COVID-19 is not mentioned. 
 In July, Tuberville raised funds and held face-to-face meetings in Washington, D.C., defying orders from the city that visitors from certain coronavirus hot spots quarantine upon arrival, the Washington Post reported. "The D.C. Democrat mayor’s order specifically applies only to nonessential travel, and Coach Tuberville was not up there sightseeing," his campaign responded in a statement.
 But we found that Tuberville has expressed some opinions on the response to the pandemic, especially in the education and athletic contexts:
 For playing football, returning to school: "We have to put our kids in a school — keep them protected, be socially responsible — but we need to get back to school and get back to normal life," Tuberville said Aug. 12 on Fox News. He also said college football should be played this fall: "There’s nobody more protected than college athletes and high school athletes. They have doctors, they have ways to wash their clothes that get them disinfected."
 Against extending unemployment aid: Tuberville opposed extending a $600-per-week federal bonus on unemployment checks as being "way too much." He said, according to an Aug. 6 AL.com report: "We’re having people just sit out not working because they’re making more sitting around. We’ve got to go back to work."
 On investigating the origins of the virus: Asked about whether China should be investigated regarding the origins of the coronavirus, Tuberville said it should, according to a May 7 report from WPMI-TV in Mobile. He added: "I trust President Trump to get us out of it, and everybody wants to start pointing fingers. We don’t need to point fingers until we get out of it, then we can hold whoever’s accountable, accountable."
 Tuberville’s campaign referred us to a July 23 radio interview it described as representative of statements Tuberville has made on COVID-19. On that show, Tuberville noted that the virus affects people differently, complained that medical experts such as Dr. Anthony Fauci have often been wrong about the virus, and said: "If you need to wear a mask, wear a mask." 
 He reiterated that kids need to return to school, perhaps with modifications for children or teachers who have health risks. "These people make a lot of money, these superintendents and principals. They can figure out a way to make it safe for the teachers and the kids. We’ve got to get back to school and we’ve got to get back to athletics," he said.
 Our ruling
 Tuberville did say in March he "wouldn’t have a clue" about whether to make stimulus payments to Americans unemployed by the pandemic or to send them back to work. And in July, when asked what his approach to the pandemic would be, he said: "But I don’t know which way you go, at the end of the day, whether you’re right or wrong, or anything that you do with this."
 Tuberville also has not laid out a plan for what he would do about COVID-19, but he has stated some positions, including that people should return to work and children should return to school.
 Jones’ statement is accurate, but needs additional information — our definition of Mostly True.
Authorities are trying to figure how they can hold elections while preventing voters from infecting each other with coronavirus.
 One idea? Expand the practice of absentee voting.
 In North Carolina, top Republicans have said they want to keep the state’s current absentee voting laws. A pair of Democrats -- Jay Chaudhuri of Wake County and Natasha Marcus of Mecklenburg -- have described North Carolina’s absentee rules as antiquated.
 "North Carolina is in the small minority of states that requires an absentee ballot to be signed by two witnesses or a notary public," they wrote in an April 10 op-ed on Medium.com.
 Is it true that NC is in a "minority" of states that requires two people to witness an absentee ballot? Yes.
 Verifying absentee ballots
 A breakdown of absentee rules is available via the National Conference of State Legislatures, a nonpartisan group that tracks various laws in each state.
 In most states -- 31 according to the NCSL -- elections boards simply compare the voter’s signature on an absentee ballot with a signature they already have on file for the voter. If there’s a discrepancy, election officials investigate.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 North Carolina is one of eight states that requires a witness to sign a voter’s absentee ballot, and one of only three states that requires the ballot to be signed by two witnesses if a notary isn’t available. The other states are Alabama and Rhode Island.
 The information on the NCSL website was confirmed as accurate by conference spokeswoman Wendy Underhill.
 That doesn’t necessarily mean that North Carolina is the hardest state to return an absentee ballot.
 Alabama, in addition to requiring signatures from two witnesses or a notary, requires voters to submit a copy of a voter ID with his ballot.
 In Mississippi, Missouri and Oklahoma, you can’t have just any witness. The ballots are required to be signed by a notary.
 Rules for who qualifies for an absentee ballot vary by state, too. 
 Our ruling
 State Senators Marcus and Chaudhuri said "North Carolina is in the small minority of states that requires an absentee ballot to be signed by two witnesses or a notary public."
 According to a nonpartisan organization that tracks state laws, NC is one of only three states (6 percent of the US) that requires absentee ballots to be signed by two witnesses or a notary public. We rate this statement true.
Health officials across the country are bracing for the likely spread of the new coronavirus in the United States, which federal officials have said is inevitable.
 The new virus was first reported in China, which remains the epicenter of the outbreak. The virus has spread to at least 57 other countries.
 U.S. Customs and Border Protection has procedures in place when it comes to apprehending individuals attempting to cross the border illegally who may be infected with a communicable disease — regardless of their country of origin.
 In a Feb. 26 tweet starting with "BREAKING," Charlie Kirk, a conservative pundit who founded Turning Point USA, said three people from China were apprehended after attempting to cross the U.S.-Mexico border and were quarantined after displaying flu-like symptoms.
 Kirk asked people to retweet his post, which included a call for heightened border security in the face of the new virus.
 "Three Chinese nationals were apprehended trying to cross our Southern border illegally," he wrote. "Each had flu-like symptoms. Border patrol quickly quarantined them and assessed any threat of Coronavirus. Our weak border is a health risk. Close the border—Build. The. Wall. RT!"
 Kirk’s tweet gets some things right, but is missing a key detail: All three of the people apprehended by border patrol were medically cleared and returned to the custody of immigration officials.
 Kirk’s spokesman Andrew Kolvet pointed to a Fox News segment about the apprehensions, which featured an interview with Brandon Judd, president of the National Border Patrol Council.
 In the clip, Judd says that three Chinese citizens were apprehended in Del Rio and had flu-like symptoms.
 "Our agents acted like champs, they quarantined them immediately and transferred them to a local hospital," Judd said. "Luckily, they did not have the coronavirus."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Details from Border Patrol
 A Customs and Border Patrol spokesman said agents apprehend approximately five Chinese nationals a day within the agency’s Rio Grande Valley Sector on the Texas-Mexico border, a number that represents "an extremely small percentage of our overall daily apprehension totals."
 "Although we haven’t encountered any issues to date, we do have measures in place to identify individuals with signs of illness who may be potentially infected with a communicable disease," he said in a statement from the agency. "Individuals identified with symptoms of illness are referred to (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) or local health officials for additional health screening."
 The agency put this protocol into action on Feb. 10, when agents apprehended three Chinese nationals near Eagle Pass, after they crossed the Rio Grande along the Texas-Mexico border, according to a description of the event provided by the spokesman.
 The individuals were taken to the Eagle Pass Station, where officials determined that two of the three people had a fever, according to a Border Patrol official. At that point, all three individuals were taken immediately to a local hospital for assessment, before being taken inside the station.
 All three people were medically cleared for travel and turned over to Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
 Since the individuals were taken directly to the hospital after a health assessment, they were not placed in quarantine at the Border Patrol station or taken to a designated quarantine station.
 Our ruling
 Kirk said: "Three Chinese nationals were apprehended trying to cross our Southern border illegally. Each had flu-like symptoms. Border Patrol quickly quarantined them and assessed any threat of Coronavirus."
 On Feb. 10, three people from China were apprehended at the border and two had a fever. All three were taken to a local hospital for assessment and were medically cleared for travel. None of the individuals were quarantined at the station.
 Kirk’s tweet gets some things right, but includes inaccurate details, like the number of people with symptoms and whether individuals were quarantined. He also leaves out the conclusion of this saga: None of the people had coronavirus.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
President Biden signed into law The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, or the ARP for short, on March 11 after a party-line vote in the U.S. Senate and with no Republican support to go along with two "no" Democrat votes in the U.S. House. The act provides U.S. citizens with financial support during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 Many people are familiar with the third round of stimulus checks that came from the legislation, but the ARP includes additional provisions for economic relief, including emergency funding for states, homeowner assistance, and small business credit.
 Given the act’s partisan vote, we noted that one of the Iowa Democratic Party’s leaders, state Senate Minority Leader Zach Wahls, promoted the act when writing in one of his weekly newsletters:
 "The federal American Rescue Plan will purchase more food from farmers for distribution through food banks, nonprofits and restaurants, helping to feed families in need and support farmers’ bottom lines."
 In an email exchange with The Daily Iowan, Wahls referenced a March 10 U.S. Department of Agriculture fact sheet as the primary source for his claim, which matched his newsletter almost word for word. But, does that mean more is being spent on farmers? 
 The answer is yes, although allocated money in this program also goes to non-farmers.
 U.S. Department of Agriculture performance manager Chris Nelson said in a phone interview with the DI that $4 billion is being added to the USDA’s budget for spending in 2021 and in upcoming years. Subsection A of the ARP’s Section 1001 states that $4 billion will be appropriated to the USDA to fund the legislation’s agriculture relief effort.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, Nelson said the USDA still must determine where, specifically, to spend the $4 billion.
 Nelson said the USDA annually releases a budget report for the following year. He said the budget for fiscal 2022, which normally would have been published two months ago, was delayed because of the presidential transition and won’t be published until May or June.
 The USDA’s budget summary for fiscal 2021, published in February 2020 does not include ARP’s $4 billion.
 As for the legislation’s agriculture relief effort, the $4 billion is to be used to purchase fresh food and distribute it to nonprofits, food banks, and restaurants, according to Section 1001. The same section also states the $4 billion is to finance loans and grants for food processors, distributors, and producers as additional aid in response to the pandemic.
 Andrew Wheeler, the media contact for the Iowa Farm Bureau, said efforts to buy fresh produce directly from farmers tend to happen over a prolonged period of time because of the need to wait until after the growing season occurs.
 Our ruling
 How the American Rescue Plan is to be spent still is to be determined. But, while the act doesn’t specifically call out farmers by name, it explicitly orders a new $4 billion USDA appropriation to buy fresh food for nonprofits, food banks, and restaurants, plus additional relief for non-farmers in the food supply chain. 
 We rate this claim to be True.
Social media users misinterpreted an announcement by Montana Gov. Greg Gianforte, a Republican, about the state’s unemployment aid program. 
 "Montana is canceling unemployment because of a workforce shortage!" reads a Facebook post. 
 The post is misleading. It was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Here’s what really happened: 
 Gianforte announced on May 4 that Montana planned to leave the federal program that established extra benefits for people receiving unemployment assistance during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 Montanans would still be eligible for state unemployment benefits, just not the federal enhancement. With the federal program still in place, unemployed Montanans were eligible for between $451 and $810 per week in benefits. In June, when Montana is scheduled to leave the program, weekly benefits are set to fall to between $151 and $510 per week.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As part of the CARES Act, which President Donald Trump signed into law in March 2020, the federal government approved $600 in additional weekly benefits for unemployed workers on top of state unemployment benefits. After that benefit expired in July, it was replaced by $300 weekly payments included in another relief package in December. The American Rescue Plan, the $1.9 trillion package that President Joe Biden signed in March 2021, extended those benefits through Labor Day. 
 Gianforte cast his plan to leave the federal program as an attempt to combat a state labor shortage. "Montana is open for business again, but I hear from too many employers throughout our state who can’t find workers. Nearly every sector in our economy faces a labor shortage," he said in a statement. 
 Withdrawing from the federal program is one of two measures that Gianforte announced in May to spur hiring. The second is the launch of a return-to-work program that will grant previously unemployed Montanans a $1,200 bonus if they remain steadily employed for at least a month. The return-to-work bonus will be federally funded by the American Rescue Plan. 
 Montana is the first state to announce plans to leave the federal unemployment program. A few days later, South Carolina became the second, with Gov. Henry McMaster scheduling a withdrawal from the program by June 30. 
 Our ruling
 "Montana is canceling unemployment because of a workforce shortage!" reads a Facebook post. 
 Gianforte announced that the state will withdraw from the federal unemployment assistance program established to help those out of work during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the state unemployment program remains in place. The change means that two-thirds of weekly benefits on the low end of assistance and two-fifths on the high end will effectively be canceled.
 The statement is partially accurate but missing critical context, so we rate it Half True.
Veterans groups in Pennsylvania typically prepare for Memorial Day by placing small American flags beside the headstones where fallen service members have been laid to rest.
 When a state lawmaker from Erie County learned that the coronavirus might scuttle that sacred tradition, he posted about it on Facebook.
 "Gov. Wolf is not allowing companies that distribute U.S. flags to ship out orders to be placed at veteran’s graves for Memorial Day," Pa. House Rep. Brad Roae posted on Facebook on May 11.
 We wondered whether Wolf had really blocked Pennsylvania-based American flag distributors from operating during the pandemic.
 Roae, a Republican, did not return a call seeking comment on his Facebook post, which has now been shared more than 7,000 times. But it looks like he was right.
 Not only did Wolf exclude FlagZone, a manufacturer located in Gilbertsville, from his original list of life-sustaining businesses permitted to operate during the pandemic, his administration doubled down and rejected the company’s application for a waiver. 
 FlagZone is one of the only American flag manufacturer in Pennsylvania and one of only a half dozen across the country. The company typically distributes more than six million small stick flags annually. 
 Casey Smith, a spokesperson for the Pennsylvania Department of Community & Economic Development, told The Reading Eagle that the Wolf administration’s top priority is protecting the health and well-being of Pennsylvanians, and that flag-making, while patriotic, simply wasn’t "life-sustaining."
 "Memorial Day celebrations and ceremonies are a staple in our nation, and many Pennsylvanians will need to adjust their routine this year to accommodate our new normal," Smith said. "We encourage all Pennsylvanians to honor our nation’s fallen in their own special way."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turns out the flags had already been manufactured and were sitting in a warehouse.
 FlagZone President Daniel Ziegler said it would only take a few workers to ship 400,000 flags that had been ordered by 24 different Pennsylvania counties in anticipation of Monday’s federal holiday. Bucks, Chester and Delaware counties were among those waiting to receive their orders. 
 When State Sen. Scott Hutchinson learned about FlagZone’s woes, he also called on Wolf to ease restrictions imposed on the company.
 "I see no reason why the time-honored and solemn tradition of placing flags at veterans’ graves could not be continued this year," Hutchinson, a Republican who represents Butler and other Western Pennsylvania counties, said in a statement sent to reporters via email. "Certainly placing the flags in cemeteries could be done while practicing the social distancing Gov. Wolf recommends."
 On Monday, FlagZone got some good news.
 The state cleared the way for the company to ship some flag orders even as it held firm that flag manufacturing is not essential during the pandemic.
 "We’re just excited to get these flags out after months of being shut down," Ziegler told The Reading Eagle. "Hopefully, when a family goes to the gravesite of a loved one who was a veteran they will now see that they were not forgotten."
 Smith, of the community and economic development department, said in an interview that special approval from the state is not required for limited shipping activities and communicated that to FlagZone.
 Our ruling
 Roae posted on Facebook that Gov. Wolf had blocked companies that distribute American flags from shipping orders ahead of Memorial Day. Wolf initially blocked FlagZone from operating during the pandemic and then rejected the company’s request for a waiver. A state official later said the company did not need special permission to ship limited numbers of flags. However, the company didn’t understand this until the state said so, especially since the clarification came days after the Wolf administration rejected FlagZone’s application to resume operations. We rate Roae’s statement Mostly True.
When President Donald Trump threatened to reject the coronavirus economic relief package passed with wide bipartisan support, U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey appeared on Fox News to defend the plan and stress how urgently businesses need relief. 
 "In my state, as in many other states, we have governors who are closing down businesses again," Toomey, a Republican from Pennsylvania, said Sunday before Trump relented and signed the measure into law. 
 We wondered how sweeping the latest round of virus shutdowns is and what types of establishments are affected. 
 Earlier this month, Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf halted indoor dining, closed casinos, gyms, and entertainment venues, and lowered retail occupancy limits statewide for the first time since the spring. The new restrictions came as the state started reporting more than 10,000 new infections per day. 
 Wolf said he hoped the restrictions would slow the spread of the virus and prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed just before vaccines become widely available. 
 "This is a bridge to a better future in Pennsylvania," Wolf said. 
 Before this latest round of closures, all 67 Pennsylvania counties had been in the "green" phase of the Wolf administration’s three-step reopening plan since July 3, even though Trump falsely claimed otherwise on the campaign trail. That allowed many businesses to operate at 75% capacity. 
 Since the new rules took effect on Dec. 11, the number of new cases reported each day in Pennsylvania fell to as low as 4,621 on Dec. 27, and the seven-day average fell to 7,757. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The restrictions are set to expire on Jan. 4, but Pennsylvania Health Secretary Rachel Levine said the state may extend them if cases climb again in the days ahead. A local ban on indoor dining in Philadelphia will remain in effect until Jan. 15.
 Soon after Wolf announced this latest round of restrictions, at least a dozen gym and restaurant owners across Pennsylvania publicly vowed to defy them. 
 Business owners argued they should be allowed to stay open because internal data they collected showed their establishments hadn’t been the source of any community spread. A recent Stanford University study, however, linked restaurants, gyms, and crowded indoor spaces to 80% of infections in 10 U.S. cities in the early months of the pandemic. 
 "If I have to prove my point by being taken out in handcuffs, then so be it," said Phil Guarno, who owns Fenicci’s Italian restaurant in Hershey, Pa., which has remained open for indoor dining despite the new order. "It’s gotten to the point where it’s really do or die. It’s time to stand up against this tyranny."
 The relief bill includes a new round of subsidies for hard-hit businesses like Guarno’s, as well as temporary $300 per week supplemental jobless benefits for the unemployed and $600 direct payments to most Americans. Schools, healthcare providers, and renters facing eviction will also get relief. 
 Across the country, at least seven other states and the District of Columbia have joined Pennsylvania and imposed restrictions on large numbers of businesses. They include Illinois, Minnesota, Washington, Oregon, California, Arizona, and New Mexico. Ten states have halted activity at some businesses, and elsewhere, establishments remain largely open even as the pandemic rages on.
 Our ruling 
 Toomey said "in my state, as in many other states, we have governors who are closing down businesses again." 
 He’s right that Pennsylvania shuttered many businesses earlier this month, and seven other states have imposed similarly sweeping restrictions. We rate Toomey’s statement True.
Former President Barack Obama once famously said "the pundits like to slice-and-dice our country into red states and blue states" -- instead of simply the United States.
 But in the lead-up to the 2020 presidential election, the candidates themselves are creating these separate "countries" to make their point about the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. 
 In a campaign stop in Manitowoc on Sept. 21, 2020, Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden struck back at an assertion Republican President Donald Trump had made earlier in the month about coronavirus deaths: That so-called "blue states" were driving the country’s high death rates. 
 Trump, trying to burnish his performance in combating the virus, had said if those states were removed from the equation, the United States would really be "at a very low level" of deaths. 
 In Manitowoc, where Biden visited a foundry, he said Trump was wrong. 
 "If you just count all the deaths in the red states, we are number two in the world in deaths, just behind Brazil," Biden said. 
 Trump is off track in claiming that U.S. coronavirus deaths, which have topped 200,000, would be low if some states were not counted — an illogical argument from the get-go, because the country cannot be split that way. 
 Biden, meanwhile, is mostly on track in claiming that if red states somehow were split off, they would still account for the second-highest death counts in the world, depending on how you define red and blue states. 
 Let’s dig in. 
 Defining "red states" by states that voted for Trump in 2016
 When asked for evidence for Biden’s claim, a Biden campaign spokesperson pointed to a Sept, 16, 2020, analysis piece from the Washington Post, which tallies virus deaths by which 2016 presidential candidate a state supported. 
 By that analysis, and as of that date, the author wrote, more than 90,000 deaths had occurred in red states, which would have ranked second in the world. 
 The argument holds up even after considering more recent death tolls. The 30 states that Trump took in 2016 had recorded 97,329 deaths in total as of Sept. 28, 2020. Here’s the breakdown, according to a New York Times case and death tracker: 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Alabama, 2,501; Alaska, 52; Arizona, 5,624; Arkansas, 1,329; Florida, 14,036; Georgia, 6,803; Idaho, 460; Indiana, 3,591; Iowa, 1,321; Kansas, 641; Kentucky, 1,195; Louisiana, 5,480; Michigan, 7,052; Mississippi, 2,921; Missouri, 2,119; Montana, 174; Nebraska, 487; North Carolina, 3,468; North Dakota, 237; Ohio, 4,746; Oklahoma, 1,007; Pennsylvania, 8,181; South Carolina, 3,337; South Dakota, 218; Tennessee, 2,362; Texas, 15,854; Utah, 453; West Virginia, 337; Wisconsin, 1,293; Wyoming, 50.
 If we were to only count these states, the death total as of that date would fit between Brazil at the top of the chart (141,741) and India at number three (95,542), making Biden’s claim spot-on. 
 Defining "red states" as states that have Republican governors 
 Biden characterized red and blue states in a different way during his speech. 
 "Think about what (Trump) is saying. He's saying, if you live in a state like Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania, states with Democratic governors, you're not his problem. He has no obligation to you," the former vice president said. 
 That’s defining blue states as states with Democratic governors, which Trump himself may have been getting at with his comment about blue states, in which, at one point, he cited "blue state-managed" leadership. 
 It still doesn’t make Trump’s claim accurate. It does, however, make Biden’s a bit less of a bullseye.
 The 26 states whose governors are currently Republicans had a combined total of 83,695 deaths as of Sept. 28, 2020, behind Brazil and India, coming in third in the world. Here’s the breakdown: 
 Alabama 2,501; Alaska, 52; Arizona, 5,624; Arkansas, 1,329; Florida, 14,036; Georgia, 6,803; Idaho, 460; Indiana, 3,591; Iowa, 1,321; Maryland, 3,938; Massachusetts, 9,415; Mississippi, 2,921; Missouri, 2,119; Nebraska, 487; New Hampshire, 439; North Dakota, 237; Ohio, 4,746; Oklahoma, 1,007; South Carolina, 3,337; South Dakota, 218; Tennessee, 2,362; Texas, 15,854; Utah, 453; Vermont, 58; West Virginia, 337; Wyoming, 50. 
 Still, the facts here are clear. No one can split the nation in half based on political parties to spin death counts one way or another. 
 Our death toll is what it is, and it is high — the highest in the world, by more than 50,000. Even when adjusted for population, the United States ranks 11th in the world for total deaths. 
 Our rating 
 Biden claimed that the U.S. death total from the coronavirus in red states alone would rank second in the world. 
 Depending on how one interprets "red states," this is either spot-on or close to accurate. 
 We rate his claim Mostly True.
Soaring milk production and plummeting consumption have dealt a series of devastating blows to Wisconsin dairy farmers in recent years.
 But the coronavirus pandemic has been a next-level gut-shot.
 Shuttered schools and restaurants have cut off much of the demand for dairy, even as panicked shoppers bought out milk and other dairy products — and just about everything else in sight — as the quarantine began.
 A heavily-viewed Facebook video painted the scene this way:
 "Although grocery store dairy shelves remain sparse … dairy farmers are being forced to dump thousands of pounds of milk down the drain," says the two-minute clip from Courtenay DeHoff TV.
 The clip goes on to say it’s not as simple as shifting production from school products to grocery store ones.
 "Production lines are shuttering, and they’re scrambling to suddenly mass produce jugs when they are used to mass producing the little cardboard boxes handed out at schools."
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Are farmers really dumping milk even as grocery stores are short of it? And are production limitations on liquid milk to blame?
 We checked it out.
 Supply chain effects from quarantine
 Experts we spoke with said the factors cited in the video are accurate, but said a few other important elements are at play as well.
 The quarantine has affected both the way liquid milk is consumed and the kind of processed dairy products needed. The Wall Street Journal said that has left dairy producers with at least 10% more milk than the industry can use.
 Dennis Rodenbaugh, executive vice president at Dairy Farmers of America, the largest U.S. dairy cooperative, told the Wall Street Journal for an April 9, 2020, story that as much as 7% of the milk produced in the U.S. the prior week was dumped.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Patrick Geoghegan, executive vice president of industry relations for Dairy Farmers of Wisconsin, said the market swings have been enormous.
 "Milk is being disposed of because of a massive and sudden loss of markets — more than half the nation’s restaurants are closed, sales of cheese are down 70 percent and some 44 percent of the nation’s cheese is sold through foodservice channels," he said in an email to PolitiFact Wisconsin, citing the group’s industry research.
 Some of the demand that remains is for products the industry isn’t set up to immediately produce. Shifting butter production, for example, from tiny packets for restaurants to large blocks for grocery stores can’t happen overnight.
 But the use of liquid milk had changed dramatically as well — and that’s the element the Facebook video focused on.
 Geoghegan said sales of fluid milk were up 55% for two consecutive weeks in March, though by early April it had fallen back to about 35% above norm.
 As of early April, grocery stores are more consistently stocked, but there simply wasn’t the space or production to meet that initial demand in time.
 "The shelf just doesn’t hold enough and they (couldn’t) restock often enough," said Doug Adams, president of Prime Consulting, which researches the dairy industry.
 Dean Foods confirmed that their shift in production was in line with what the video described. They reduced production of paperboard milk cartons for schools by "well over 50%" after schools closed.
 "As panic buying reached its peak, we shifted production to focus on products most in demand (whole and 2% milk for retail business) to maximize our output efficiency," said Anne Divjak, vice president of government relations & external communications. "Demand has since normalized and we are back to normal production runs but still seeing significant declines in school milk and foodservice business."
 School milk does comprise about 7% of all liquid milk sales, Adams said. But much of that demand remains since school feeding programs remain active.
 Geoghegan said there have even been intermittent shortages of school milk, since bottlers have diverted resources to meet grocery store demand.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook video focused on liquid milk said bottling limitations mean grocery stores are short on milk even as farmers are dumping it.
 That is a factor, but it over-simplifies the situation a bit. Disappearing markets for cheese, butter and other dairy products in restaurants play a critical role in the suddenly changing dairy economy as well, experts say.
 Milk is being dumped not just because it can’t be bottled in the proper way, but because the overall demand for all dairy products is down. And because the forms of butter and cheese needed have changed with people largely confined to their homes.
 We rate this Half True.
As of March 15, 33 states had decided to close public schools in hopes of curbing the spread of COVID-19. Millions of students could stay out of school for the rest of the academic year, the Washington Post reports. And so amid the fearmongering and misinformation on Facebook, we found a bright spot: posts, such as this one, claiming that Spectrum would provide free internet to students without it. 
 "If students don’t have access to internet they can call 1.844.488.8398 during the school shutdown for free internet from Spectrum," the March 13 post says. 
 It was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 But this post happens to be true. 
 Charter Communications, a company that provides internet service under the brand Spectrum, on March 13 announced it would offer free internet for 60 days for households with students who don’t already have a Spectrum subscription. The number listed is one digit different than the number in the Facebook post — 1-844-488-8395 — but both connected to Spectrum when we tried calling on March 16. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "In the coming weeks, many Americans will be affected either directly or indirectly by COVID-19 and Charter is focused on serving and supporting our 29 million customers," the company said in a press release. 
 Starting March 16, Charter also started waiving installation fees for new student households and opening its wifi hotspots for public use to, it said, "ease the strain during this challenging time."
 Comcast has announced similar measures, pledging free wifi hotspots around the country "available to anyone who needs them" and providing free internet for new customers for 60 days. If existing customers contact the company and let it know that they can’t pay their bills right now, the company won’t disconnect their internet service or charge late fees, the company said.
 Both Comcast and Charter Communications seem to be heeding the call of Federal Communications Commission Chairman Aji Pai, who asked broadband and telephone service providers on March 12 to help keep Americans connected during the coronavirus outbreak, according to the FCC. 
 We rate this Facebook post True.
Wisconsin’s congressional delegation is embroiled in a debate over whether to send more aid to state and local governments squeezed by the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic.
 The Democratic-controlled House of Representatives in May passed the so-called HEROES Act, which would allocate nearly $1 trillion to state, local and tribal governments, among other provisions. However, Republican lawmakers and President Donald Trump balked at that plan. The Senate has not passed its own version of a new COVID-relief bill, but White House officials are negotiating with Democrats in hopes of reaching an agreement on various issues.
 In the midst of the debate, one Wisconsin Republican suggested Wisconsin may not need another round of federal funding.
 "According to the Treasury Department, 3.8% of Wisconsin’s coronavirus funding has been spent," U.S. Rep. Bryan Steil tweeted on July 30, 2020. "The rest is unaccounted for. I’ve asked Gov. (Tony) Evers to explain."
 Steil, who represents the state’s 1st Congressional District, hinged his argument on data from the U.S. Department of Treasury that points to the same figure. 
 But the Treasury’s report is only part of the story.
 Breaking down the numbers
 Wisconsin received about $2.26 billion through the CARES Act to help the state manage costs stemming from the pandemic. Around $260 million of that went to Dane County, Milwaukee County and the city of Milwaukee, which were eligible for direct payments because their populations are over 500,000.
 That left the state with roughly $2 billion. Evers can direct the spending. He does not need approval from the Legislature.
 When asked for evidence to support Steil’s claim, a spokeswoman pointed to the report from the U.S. Department of the Treasury, which shows Wisconsin has spent or transferred around $75.6 million, or 3.8%, of its $2 billion in CARES Act funds. Recipients were required to report their spending to the department’s Office of Inspector General from March 1 to June 30.
 On July 29, Steil wrote a letter to Evers seeking "greater clarity on Wisconsin’s use of existing federal resources." In the letter — but not the tweet — he notes that some funds have been spent while others were only obligated.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The letter cited a June 18 memo from the Legislative Fiscal Bureau, which outlined $1.72 billion in COVID-19 initiatives that would be covered through the CARES Act. That leaves $280 million in federal dollars remaining.
 Among the plans: $200 million in aid for local and tribal governments, $260 million for a COVID-19 testing program and $110 million to provide assistance to health care providers. Another $445 million was set aside for "hospital and community preparedness" in the event cases surge before the end of the year.
 The state Department of Administration detailed those funding commitments in a July 17 letter to the U.S. Treasury Department. According to the letter, provided by Evers’ office, the documented amount does not include at least $67.2 million in costs incurred before June 30 that will be covered by federal funding.
 Those funds will also cover $108.3 million already obligated for the state’s coronavirus response, the letter states.
 "Because of the difference in timing between purchase orders, invoices, and payments, however, as well as the reimbursement model used for several of these programs, today’s interim report will capture only a portion (of) the reach of Wisconsin’s CRF funded commitments at the present moment," wrote Joanna Beilman-Dulin of the DOA. 
 Translation: The spending reported by the U.S. Department of Treasury tracks just that — spending. It doesn’t include previous expenses or allocated relief funds, such as orders that have yet to be invoiced and grant programs with applications under review.
 What’s more, Evers announced on July 27 — before Steil contacted the governor — that $41.6 million in federal funds had been distributed to farmers. That amount wasn’t included in the Treasury data because it was still under review when the state submitted its report.
 That means the number Steil cited doesn’t show the complete picture. 
 Our ruling
 As Congress debates what the next federal relief package should look like, Steil claimed that "3.8% of Wisconsin’s coronavirus funding has been spent."
 A report from the U.S. Department of Treasury said Wisconsin spent or transferred 3.8% of its CARES Act funds from March 1 to June 30. But that figure doesn’t account for expenses the state already incurred or funds it has committed to other programs and response efforts.
 A statement is Half True when it’s partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. 
 That fits here.
Harrowing images of wooden caskets being lowered into mass graves in New York City circulated on social media as the city responded to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The images and related video footage are accurate depictions of recent burials on Hart Island in the Long Island Sound. That said, there have been some misconceptions about the mass graves.
 Posts about the grave site were flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 First, mass burials didn’t begin on Hart Island during the COVID-19 pandemic. The city has used the location as a public cemetery for over 150 years, burying unclaimed people and those whose loved ones can’t afford private burials. 
 Second, not all locals who die from COVID-19 are being buried there, as some posts have suggested. The site is still designated for deceased people with no known next of kin.
 But as the city struggles with the mounting death toll amid the pandemic, burials on the island have dramatically increased in recent weeks. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 There are usually about 25 burials on the island each week, the New York mayor’s press secretary Freddie Goldstein told CNN. But that number has climbed to nearly 25 each day.
 The island’s interment operation is managed by the city’s Department of Correction, and inmates usually assist in the burials. But that has changed since the pandemic.
 DOC spokesperson Jason Kersten has said that city inmates are not currently involved with the burials: "For social distancing and safety reasons, city-sentenced people in custody are not assisting in burials for the duration of the pandemic. Contracted laborers are performing this important work under DOC supervision," according to a report by the Gothamist.
 Bodies are ordinarily held at the city’s morgues anywhere from 30 to 60 days, Goldstein said. But to make room for the influx of deceased individuals during the pandemic, the city’s medical examiner’s office announced a new policy of holding unclaimed bodies for only up to 15 days before they are transferred to the island.
 Our ruling
 New York City’s Hart Island has been used as a public cemetery for unclaimed bodies since the 1800s, but the city’s staggering death toll amid the COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically increased the number of burials on the island. 
 Social media posts about the burials are mostly accurate, but many need additional information. We rate this Mostly True.
The stalemate between a Democratic governor and a Republican-dominated Legislature has left Wisconsin without a clear path forward to address the coronavirus pandemic.
 Gov. Tony Evers has declared multiple states of emergency to implement a stay-at-home order and mask mandates. Republicans — who have a stranglehold on both Legislative houses — have challenged those in court, once successfully.
 But they have chosen not to overturn Evers’ orders themselves, despite having the authority to do so.
 One viral Facebook post goes a step farther to say Republican legislators haven’t done anything at all of late.
 "Wisconsin Republicans have not passed a single bill in 6 months," says the Oct. 4, 2020, post, which is a screenshot of a tweet from the day before.
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook).
 The post goes on to criticize Republicans for pushing back against Evers, saying they haven’t "done a single thing" to slow the spread of COVID. (That’s not accurate, as Republicans did pass a COVID-19 relief bill early in the pandemic.)
 But let’s focus in on the timeframe claim. 
 Amid a global pandemic that has fundamentally changed society throughout 2020, has the Legislature really not passed a single bill in half a year?
 The last bill
 The most recent law passed through the state Legislature came in April. The Assembly passed a COVID-19 response bill on April 14, and the Senate passed it a day later. The wide-ranging bill addressed unemployment, health care, education and government procedures in the wake of the pandemic, many provisions of which applied only during the first public health emergency that was declared by Evers in March.
 That was more than five and a half months before this Facebook post. So the reference to six months is pretty much correct.
 The Legislature has taken up no legislation since then. The only other action came Aug. 31, when legislative leaders held a pro-forma special session for a less than a minute without addressing police use-of-force legislation that Evers urged them to take up.
 The context
 But let’s take a little wider view before we rule on this claim.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Legislature is a cyclical body, and a lengthy period of inaction this time of year is actually normal. The Legislature typically adjourns in spring of an election year and doesn’t come back until the new calendar year, and the 2020 calendar approved for this year back in January 2019 was no different.
 Of course, this year is anything but normal.
 So a better gauge may be how other state Legislatures have responded to the coronavirus.
 And Wisconsin lawmakers have been among the least active in the country, according to a database of all COVID-related legislation across the country maintained by the National Conference of State Legislatures.
 The bill passed in mid-April is the lone piece of coronavirus legislation adopted or enacted here, as nine other proposals failed. Only three states have done less, as North Dakota, Texas and Montana have passed no bills. Indiana has also passed one.
 Nationally, 810 COVID bills have been adopted or enacted by state legislatures, led by 71 in Louisiana, 51 in California and 50 in New Jersey.
 In many respects, it would be fair to hold Wisconsin to a higher standard of action, since it has a full-time Legislature. The national conference says Wisconsin is one of 10 states it considers full-time, meaning legislators work 80% or more of a full-time job, have large staffs and are paid enough to make a living without needing outside income.
 A Wispolitics.com analysis found Wisconsin has done far less than the other nine during the pandemic.
 The Assembly and Senate have met just twice since the pandemic began — for each house to pass the April COVID bill. The other states have met an average of 38 times, with only Illinois (nine meetings) coming in at less than 20.
 It’s important to note, however, that seven of the nine other full-time legislatures are in states with an annual budget (as opposed to Wisconsin’s biennial budget), meaning they need more floor sessions to pass that each year.
 Kit Beyer, a spokeswoman for Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, noted that while the Legislature has not been in session, legislators have other work as well. In the past six months she said legislators have worked to help constituents with issues like getting unemployment benefits and have continued to meet in committees to prepare future legislation.
 Our ruling
 A viral Facebook post says, "Wisconsin Republicans have not passed a single bill in 6 months," criticizing a lack of legislative action amid the coronavirus pandemic.
 The timeframe is largely accurate. It’s been more than five and a half months since the Legislature passed any bill.
 It’s not unusual in an election year for the Legislature to adjourn from spring until the new year. But the Wisconsin Legislature’s inaction is unusual for this year, as lawmakers have done less than almost any other state to address the pandemic despite being one of just 10 full-time legislatures in the nation.
 That makes this a reasonable statement.
 We rate this claim True.
As school districts grapple with how to educate students in the next academic year amid the coronavirus, a list summarizing some of the federal government’s suggestions for how to safely return to the classroom is being shared on social media — but it’s missing some context.
 Some people reading the list on social media are misinterpreting these suggestions as mandates. But the language throughout the CDC’s actual advice comes with numerous caveats such as "when possible," "schools may consider,"and "as feasible." 
 "Here we go," begins the text of the image being shared widely on Facebook. "New CDC guidelines for reopening schools." They’re written as follows: 
 
 Wear masks over the age of 2
 No sharing of any items or supplies, all belongings in individual cubbies or labeled containers; no sharing electronic devices, toys, games, learning aids
 Desks 6 feet apart, all facing the same way
 Distance on school buses- one child per seat, skip rows
 Install sneeze guards and partitions wherever you cannot space 6ft apart
 One way routes in hallways; tape on sidewalks and walls to assure kids stay 6ft apart
 No communal shared spaces - cafeterias, playgrounds
 Physical barriers or screens between sinks in bathrooms
 Only pre-packaged boxes or bags of food instead of cafeteria food; kids eat in classrooms
 No field trips, assemblies, or external organizations in schools. Limit volunteers and visitors. 
 Same children stay with same staff all day, no switching groups or teachers. 
 Stagger arrival and departure times for students to limit exposure to crowds of kids. 
 If possible, daily health and temperature checks. 
 And several rules about cleaning and disinfecting throughout the day and hand washing frequently.
 
 "This is off CDC website about school starting back in the fall," one account wrote about the image, linking to a web page about "considerations for schools" on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. 
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 The inconsistent punctuation and casual language — "here we go" — were the first clues: this image of "guidelines" isn’t directly from the CDC website. But the CDC did update its "considerations for schools" on May 19, describing "ways in which schools can help protect students, teachers, administrators, and staff and slow the spread of COVID-19." 
 These are not mandates. Rather, the CDC says, schools can work with state and local health officials to decide "whether and how to implement these considerations while adjusting to meet the unique needs and circumstances of the local community." Implementation "should be guided by what is feasible, practical, acceptable, and tailored to the needs of each community." 
 The agency notes that online classes and activities are the least risky way to educate kids. Small, in-person classes with students social distancing are riskier, while full-sized, in-person classes where students aren’t spaced apart and share supplies pose the highest risk.
 The CDC also released on May 19 what the Washington Post described as a "low-key guide to reopening," including "a raft of social distancing policies" schools. Let’s look at what the agency says compared to the list circulating on Facebook.
 We’ll break it down and show you what the CDC actually said: 
 "Wear masks over the age of 2"
 Yes, the CDC says children younger than 2 should not wear masks. As for kids over the age of 2, though, it suggests schools "teach and reinforce use of cloth face coverings" and notes that masks are most essential when physical distancing is difficult.
 "No sharing of any items or supplies, all belongings in individual cubbies or labeled containers; no sharing electronic devices, toys, games, learning aids"
 The CDC says "schools may consider" implementing strategies that include avoiding sharing electronic devices, toys, books and other games or learning aids, and limiting the use of shared gym or PE equipment, art supplies, toys and games. "Discourage sharing of items that are difficult to clean or disinfect," it says. "Keep each child’s belongings separated from others’ and in individually labeled containers, cubbies or areas." 
 "Desks 6 feet apart, all facing the same way"
 This is mostly right. The CDC does recommend desks and student seats be at least 6 feet apart "when feasible." And, it says, "turn desks to face in the same direction (rather than facing each other), or have students sit on only one side of tables, space apart."
 "Distance on school buses- one child per seat, skip rows"
 Yes, "when possible" the CDC suggests creating distance between children on buses. It gives as an example the idea of seating only one child per row and skipping rows.
 "Install sneeze guards and partitions wherever you cannot space 6ft apart"
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It says to "install physical barriers" in areas where it is hard for people to keep at least 6 feet apart. Sneeze guards and partitions are examples of such barriers.
 "One way routes in hallways; tape on sidewalks and walls to assure kids stay 6ft apart"
 In areas where it’s hard for people to keep 6-feet apart, "physical guides, such as tape on floors or sidewalks and signs on walls," can be used to help make one-way hallway routes. 
 "No communal shared spaces - cafeterias, playgrounds"
 Yes, the CDC suggests closing communal spaces like dining halls and playgrounds with shared playground equipment "if possible." "Otherwise," it says, "stagger use and clean and disinfect between use."
 "Physical barriers or screens between sinks in bathrooms"
 Yes, the CDC suggests adding "physical barriers, such as plastic flexible screens, between bathroom sinks especially when they cannot be at least 6 feet apart."
 "Only pre-packaged boxes or bags of food instead of cafeteria food; kids eat in classrooms"
 "As feasible," kids should bring their own meals or else schools should "serve individually plated meals in classrooms instead of in a communal dining hall or cafeteria." At events, the CDC recommends food come in pre-packaged, single-serve boxes or bags instead of a buffet or family-style meal.
 "No field trips, assemblies, or external organizations in schools. Limit volunteers and visitors." 
 It does recommend that schools opt for "virtual activities" instead of field trips, student assemblies, special performances, school-wide parent meetings, and spirit nights." Nonessential visitors and volunteers should also be limited "as possible."
 "Same children stay with same staff all day, no switching groups or teachers." 
 Essentially, yes, but without the hard line: "Ensure that student and staff groupings are as static as possible by having the same group of children stay with the same staff (all day for young children, and as much as possible for older children). Limit mixing between groups, if possible."
 "Stagger arrival and departure times for students to limit exposure to crowds of kids." 
 The CDC suggests staggering arrival and drop-off times or locations in groups of students, or putting protocols in place to limit contact between each group.
 "If possible, daily health and temperature checks." 
 "If feasible, conduct daily health checks (e.g., temperature screening and/or symptom checking) of staff and students."
 "And several rules about cleaning and disinfecting throughout the day and hand washing frequently."
 The CDC says to "teach and reinforce handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds" and advises schools to provide hand sanitizer if soap and water aren’t readily available. It also suggests cleaning and disinfecting touched surfaces like playground equipment, door handles, sink handles and water fountains at least daily or between use as much as possible. 
 Our ruling
 The image being shared on Facebook roughly summarizes some of the CDC’s suggestions for reopening schools amid the new coronavirus. But the guidelines listed are not mandated by the CDC, and they’re not comprehensive — the agency has other suggestions not mentioned in the image, such as offering options to protect staff and students who have a higher risk of severe illness. 
 We rate this post Mostly True.
Illinois kicked off February with one of the lowest COVID-19 vaccination rates in the country, fueling frustration among many over the program’s sluggish start.
 Nearly three weeks later, Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker said the state was making progress thanks to increased supply from the federal government and the efforts of local health departments:
 "As a result, for the month of February, Illinois has been the vaccination leader among the 10 most populous states in the country," Pritzker said in a prerecorded video address, which aired Feb. 17.
 Has Illinois come as far on vaccinations this month as the governor claimed? We found Pritzker's statement was supported by one metric measured over a few days, but glossed over an otherwise spotty vaccination record.
 Different measures, mixed results
 There are many yardsticks to measure states’ progress getting their residents vaccinated against COVID-19. Illinois performs well on some metrics this month but still ranks low on others.
 Illinois started off the month 43rd in the nation for total doses administered when adjusted for population, according to Our World in Data, a University of Oxford-based project that has been tracking vaccine statistics from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. By the time Pritzker’s address aired, the state had improved to 34th nationally — and sixth place when only the 10 most populous states are considered.
 The state is also performing better on a different metric: the share of residents that have received at least one dose of the vaccine. By Feb. 17, Illinois had taken a narrow lead over the other nine most populous states, and it has occupied first, second or third place in that group each day since.
 That measurement goes hand in hand with another, though: the share of people fully vaccinated. There, Illinois ranked last among the 10 largest states — and has continued to rank at or near the bottom nationally each day. Experts say it’s tricky to compare states on this measure, however, due to differences in state policies on how much vaccine to earmark for second doses.
 Given these mixed results, we reached out to the governor’s office to find out what Pritzker was referencing when he said Illinois was the "vaccination leader" this month among large states.
 Pritzker spokeswoman Jordan Abudayyeh said that, per capita, Illinois leads the most populous states in vaccinations administered in February — and has done so "for the vast majority" of the month.
 Experts said it is fair to compare states based on the total doses administered and adjusted for population. They were split, however, on whether it makes sense to focus on a few weeks in February.
 Hemi Tewarson, a senior fellow at the Duke-Margolis Center for Health Policy, said the February snapshot might be helpful to show recent improvement after a sluggish start because of issues outside state control, such as delays with the federal pharmacy partnership program created to vaccinate those in nursing homes.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "If they started out slow back in December or early January, it's hard to catch up," she said.
 Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said that while month-to-month data is important for gauging a state’s progress internally, it’s not as useful for making comparisons because it doesn’t provide a full picture of a state’s vaccine rollout.
 Regardless, by Pritzker’s metric Illinois’ lead among large states on total doses administered per capita in February amounted to just a few days out of the month, based on our analysis of CDC figures catalogued by Our World in Data.
 To support Pritzker’s claim, Abudayyeh sent us a screenshot of a spreadsheet containing figures she said the governor’s office had taken from the CDC’s COVID-19 vaccination tracker. The spreadsheet compares how many doses were administered from Jan. 31 through Feb. 11 per 100,000 residents in the 10 most populous states.
 Those numbers could not be directly verified because the CDC’s tracker only makes available a current cumulative total on each day.
 So to check the governor’s figures we turned to Our World in Data again, which makes previous days’ CDC tallies available for users to download. Those numbers matched the governor’s analysis.
 Day to day, however, Illinois claimed first place three times out of the first 11 days of the month, hardly the "vast majority" of February as Pritzker’s spokeswoman claimed. The state’s lead was narrow, and by the time the governor’s address aired, Illinois had fallen back to second place behind Florida.
 So Priztker’s claim was accurate as of Feb. 12, the last day of his office’s analysis. It was not accurate when his speech first aired five days later.
 Our ruling
 Pritzker said that "for the month of February, Illinois has been the vaccination leader among the 10 most populous states in the country."
 There are many different ways to measure how states compare when it comes to vaccinating residents against COVID-19. On some, Illinois ranks high and on others it ranks low. Pritzker’s office pointed to one very specific metric: total doses administered per capita during the month of February alone.
 The key issue with Pritzker’s claim is that Illinois only took the lead on that metric for a handful of days prior to the governor’s prerecorded address — and had already fallen back to second place by the time it aired.
 We rate this claim Half True.
 
 HALF TRUE – The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context.
 Click here for more on the six PolitiFact ratings and how we select facts to check.
Attacks are going extreme in the two Jan. 5 runoff elections in Georgia that will determine which party controls the U.S. Senate.
 The Rev. Raphael Warnock, a Democrat who is challenging Republican Sen. Kelly Loeffler, was accused by a conservative pundit of running over his wife and having been arrested for obstructing a child abuse investigation. We rated the claim, misleading on both counts, Mostly False.
 In a lighter response, Warnock used a TV ad to poke fun at attacks on him. "Raphael Warnock eats pizza with a fork and knife, Raphael Warnock once stepped on a crack in the sidewalk, Raphael Warnock even hates puppies," the narrator says, before Warnock makes an attack of his own. 
 "Get ready, Georgia, the negative ads are coming," a smiling Warnock says. "Kelly Loeffler doesn’t want to talk about why she’s for getting rid of health care in the middle of a pandemic, so she’s going to try and scare you with lies about me." 
 He’s made the health care attack repeatedly.
 This claim exaggerates, but has some truth to it.
 Loeffler supports repealing Obamacare
 To back Warnock’s attack, his campaign cited Loeffler’s Oct. 1 vote to allow the Trump administration to proceed with its support of a lawsuit that aims to overturn the Affordable Care Act. (The specific measure would have blocked the Justice Department from pursuing the lawsuit; Loeffler voted against it.)
 Overturning Obamacare would eliminate the law’s protections for millions of people with pre-existing conditions. The protections include preventing insurance companies from excluding those people from coverage and limiting the premiums that can be charged to older people.
 RELATED: PolitiFact fact-checks and articles about the Georgia runoffs
 While it’s possible the U.S. Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in the lawsuit Nov. 10, could strike down the entire law, law experts say that’s not the most likely outcome. Still, the lawsuit’s aim is to repeal the law entirely.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Warnock’s campaign also argues that the lawsuit would eliminate health care coverage for millions of people who are insured through marketplaces set up by Obamacare or through the law’s expansion of Medicaid. 
 The New York Times reported that if Obamacare is struck down, 21 million people are at serious risk of becoming uninsured.
 Obamacare alternatives not as strong
 In addition, Warnock’s campaign cites Loeffler’s support for two measures that would provide health coverage options that it criticizes, arguing that they would result in a loss of health care. 
 Loeffler supports allowing for more short-term, limited-duration health insurance plans, which she says gives consumers more options. Those plans are exempt from Obamacare’s protections for pre-existing conditions, however.
 Loeffler also backed a controversial Medicaid waiver, sought by Republican Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp and approved by the federal government. Kemp contends the waiver will help residents who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to qualify for subsidies on the federal marketplace. 
 But some 400,000 Georgians who bought individual health insurance plans on the federal healthcare.gov Affordable Care Act shopping website will instead have to work through private brokers or insurance companies., Critics say 60,000 Georgians could be left without health insurance.
 Railing against what she calls the left’s efforts to turn health care into a government-run system, Loeffler on Nov. 13 released a health care plan that she says will protect people with pre-existing conditions while offering them more options. It includes the short-term plans and the Medicaid waiver. It does not include the same robust protections that the federal Affordable Care Act has. 
 Our ruling
 Warnock said Loeffler is "for getting rid of health care in the middle of a pandemic." That’s an overly broad statement that could be interpreted any number of ways. 
 The facts are that Loeffler voted to let the Trump administration continue supporting a lawsuit that seeks to overturn the Affordable Care Act. Millions of people could lose health care if the Supreme Court throws out the law.
 Loeffler supports offering health care alternatives, but critics say they are not as good as Obamacare’s provisions.
 Warnock’s statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details. Our rating is Half True.
 
 
 This fact check is available at IFCN’s 2020 US Elections FactChat #Chatbot on WhatsApp. Click here, for more.
During a video interview with the Texas Tribune, U.S. Rep. Chip Roy, a Republican from Austin, discussed the status of coronavirus in the state and spoke about a number of policies under consideration — including whether mail-in voting should be expanded for the general election in November.
 Citing concerns about voter fraud, Roy said it doesn’t make sense to "flip our system on its head and convert to all, or significant, mail voting" or online voting.
 Instead, he said state officials should be able to find a way to make in-person voting safe by the time the November election rolls around. He pointed to Wisconsin as evidence that in-person voting could be safe, even during a pandemic.
 Wisconsin’s presidential primary election was held April 7, after a legal fight and much public debate about whether it was safe for voters to go to the polls in the middle of the pandemic.
 "If you look at Wisconsin, I’ve yet to see a spike or anything (in coronavirus cases) that anybody has said was statistically significant related to the fact that they had voting," Roy said. 
 Evan Smith, chief executive officer of the Texas Tribune, interjected and said: "In fact, the Wisconsin Health Department said that 36 people at least are believed to have gotten the virus as a consequence of voting in person. There has been reporting on this."
 Roy replied: "I’ve looked at that report and I’ve looked at studies and I’ve not seen any significant study that has shown a spike as a result of their election. By the way, that was in the heat of the initial outbreak a few weeks ago. What we’re talking about is laying out a system where this can work, and we’ve got until November to do it."
 PolitiFact Wisconsin has examined other claims related to its election, but is it true that there was no statistically significant spike in COVID-19 cases as a result of the election?
 Roy’s office did not return a request for comment.
 Tracking cases
 In the weeks since April 7, health experts in Wisconsin have attempted to track the number of COVID-19 cases with links to the election. 
 The tally includes people who tested positive for COVID-19 after April 9 who reported having voted in person or who worked at the polls on the day of the election. The tally does not include people who voted or worked the polls but started to display symptoms after April 21.
 As of May 7, Wisconsin had identified 67 people who fit this criteria, according to Jennifer Miller, spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But that does not guarantee that these individuals contracted the virus while voting, a point state health officials have emphasized.
 In an interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (a PolitiFact Wisconsin partner), Darren Rausch, lead for the Milwaukee County COVID-19 Epidemiology Intel Team, said the election’s timing makes it difficult to link cases to the voting.
 "What complicated our analysis is also included in this time frame is both the Easter and Passover holiday weekends, and both of those included the opportunity for significant breaches of the safer-at-home order," he said. "So that was complicating our work from the beginning."
 In total, Wisconsin had reported 8,901 cumulative positive coronavirus tests on May 6, when Roy made this statement. That total includes 335 new cases recorded that day.
 On election day, an estimated 413,000 people voted in person across Wisconsin, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Experts said a surge tied to the election would have appeared in statewide data at the end of April, given the incubation period of the coronavirus. But, no surge appeared.
 One factor could be mitigation efforts in place across the state at the time, as cellphone data analyzed by researchers showed residents complying with stay-at-home orders in the week after the election.
 Since then, the number of cases linked to the election increased from about 40 to 67.
 Dr. Ryan Westergaard, the chief medical officer at the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, said there is reason to believe the election did expose some individuals to the virus, but there is not enough data to point towards a statewide trend.
 "With the data we have, we can't prove an association," Westergaard said in an interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. "It would be speculative to say that was definitely the cause without really investigating closely and being clear that somebody really had no other potential exposure to infected people. I don’t think we have the resources to really do that to know definitely."
 Public figures have repeatedly tried to connect trends in coronavirus cases in Wisconsin with the election, but other factors have impacted the data. On April 22, the state saw a spike in cases, but the spike was tied to outbreaks at meatpacking plants in the state — not the election.
 A different spike, identified earlier in April, was due to a change in the number of tests being administered. Facebook posts suggested that the state was seeing more cases, but this was due to a dip in the number of tests administered and a subsequent increase in testing.
 Our ruling
 Roy said Wisconsin has not had a spike in coronavirus cases that was "statistically significant related to the fact that they had voting."
 Wisconsin has linked 67 coronavirus cases to the April 7 primary election in the state, a small fraction of the state’s total cases. But the data is limited. Health officials said there is significant uncertainty surrounding these figures, and the election’s true impact might be impossible to determine.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
Del. Kirk Cox has been leading Republican criticism that Virginia is off to a slow start in getting COVID-19 vaccines into the arms of citizens.
 Cox laid the blame on outgoing Democratic Gov. Ralph Northam on Jan. 13 during the GOP response to Northam’s State of the Commonwealth speech.
 "The Northam administration’s ability to distribute and administer vaccines has been extremely disappointing," Cox said. "Ranking in the bottom third of states nationally, every state we border is doing a better job than Virginia in administering this life-saving vaccine."
 Cox, from Colonial Heights, is a former speaker of the House who is seeking the Republican gubernatorial nomination this year, and his criticism is likely to become a campaign issue. So we fact checked his claim about Virginia’s bottom-third ranking and found that he was being charitable in describing the roll out.
 The day Cox made his statement, Virginia ranked 39th among states in getting its allotted vaccine doses into people’s arms, according to Becker’s Hospital Review, a health systems website that, among many other things, analyzes data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 Since then, Virginia’s ranking has fallen. On Jan. 19, the latest date of CDC data available at this writing, Virginia ranked 48th. From the 853,000 vaccines distributed to the state, 327,000 shots were given - a 38.3% rate.
 The national rate was 50.4%. The two states trailing Virginia were Georgia and Alabama. North Dakota had the highest rate, using 82% of its allotted vaccines for shots.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Northam’s response
 At a Jan. 14 news conference, Northam said he was satisfied with the vaccine rollout. "This is probably one of the most massive logistical efforts that has ever taken place in Virginia, when you think about it, to get 8.5 million Virginians not one dose, but two doses," he said. "I’m pleased with the way we’ve rolled."
 Administration officials have said published Virginia data is undercounted because of delays and glitches in the state’s electronic reporting system. During the seven-day period ending on Jan. 19, Virginia averaged giving 17,464 shots a day, according to the state Department of Health’s dashboard. Northam said he wants to reach 50,000 shots a day and have all Virginians double vaccinated by early to mid summer.
 Northam took steps last week to speed things up. He announced that all people 65 and older would now be eligible for the vaccine, and so would people aged 16 to 64 with health problems. Northam said that makes about half of Virginians eligible for vaccines. The rest will qualify later. 
 Our ruling 
 Cox said on Jan.13 that Virginia ranked "in the bottom third of states nationally" in getting its allotted COVID-19 vaccines into arms. Virginia ranked 39th in the nation on that date. Although not part of this ruling, it should be noted that Virginia has since fallen to 48th, even though it has picked up pace in giving vaccines.
 We rate Cox’s statement True.
North Carolina Sen. Thom Tillis is accusing his opponent of being a hypocrite.
 Tillis, a Republican, recently criticized Democrat Cal Cunningham for criticizing a federal government bailout program that benefited "his" company.
 "I supported the Paycheck Protection Program because it helped save one million NC jobs. Cal Cunningham criticized it while his company benefitted," Tillis tweeted on July 7.
 Tillis later called Cunningham a "hypocrite."
 
 There have been several other claims about Cunningham, the PPP funding and WasteZero that are worth clearing up.
 The National Republican Senatorial Committee tweeted on July 7 that Cunningham "used" funding from the program. In a press conference on July 16, North Carolina GOP Chairman Michael Whatley claimed that Cunningham "was working on this (PPP) application at the same time as he was criticizing it."
 Meanwhile, a spokeswoman for Cunningham’s campaign tweeted about the issue, referring to Cunningham’s employment in the past tense.
 But we’re going to focus on the Tillis tweet from July 7, since he’s a U.S. Senator levying a claim. Along the way, you’ll notice other claims are misleading or simply unfounded.
 Here’s a summary of what we found.
 
 
 Has Cunningham "criticized" the PPP rollout? He offered what some might call constructive criticism. He has said he supports the program, but says that administrators need to do a better job of getting funding to deserving companies. Tillis has also expressed concerns about getting money to small businesses. 
 
 
 Is WasteZero Cunningham’s company? Cunningham is not a founder and the campaign says he has no ownership stake. He was on the payroll for seven years and now works for the firm on a contract basis.
 
 
 Did Cunningham help WasteZero apply for the PPP funds or benefit from them? WasteZero’s CEO says no.
 
 
 What is the PPP?
 The Paycheck Protection Program was launched as part of the federal government’s coronavirus relief package. It offers loans designed to encourage small businesses to keep workers on their payroll during the pandemic.
 While the program has helped people, it has drawn criticism too.
 The Washington Post reported that the first pool of loan money — worth $350 billion — was gone by April 16 and left 80% of applicants without aid. Businesses that received loans came under scrutiny.
 The first wave of recipients included 43 companies that have more than the maximum number of employees typically allowed under the program, the Post reported. Recipients have also included people with connections to President Donald Trump, such as Kanye West and Jared Kushner’s family.
 The claim about Cunningham and his employer, WasteZero, was first reported by the Washington Free Beacon, a conservative news outlet.
 Cunningham and WasteZero
 The company was founded in 1991, the year Cunningham turned 18 year-old. It hired Cunningham in 2013 to be its chief marketing officer, according to a press release. 
 PPP records show that WasteZero applied for between $1 million and $2 million in loans and was approved for aid on May 3, potentially helping 115 employees.
 Cunningham’s campaign told the Charlotte Observer that he left WasteZero on March 20, a week before President Trump signed the PPP into law on March 27. 
 A WasteZero payroll document shows Cunningham’s job as general counsel was "terminated" on March 20. The campaign provided the payroll document to PolitiFact, and WasteZero CEO David Bryla verified its authenticity.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, Bryla and Cunningham himself say he still does contract work for WasteZero and is paid on an hourly basis.
 A company report filed in Massachusetts was signed by Cunningham on March 31. The report covered the 2019 calendar year. On one part of the report, Cunningham is listed as a company vice president. But, when signing the contract, Cunningham referred to himself as "other officer."
 (An aside: The Tillis campaign has accused the Cunningham campaign of lying about his involvement with the company. The Tillis campaign points to discrepancies in how Cunningham and his campaign have described his work. Cunningham told a McClatchy reporter that he is helping the company "transition" to his successor, while a campaign spokeswoman tweeted that Cunningham "used to" work there. The Tillis campaign noted that the Charlotte Observer story had to be updated to include Cunningham’s work on March 31.)
 WasteZero and PPP
 So, was Cunningham involved in the PPP application?
 Under the PPP program, small businesses could apply for a loan using payroll information dating back to February — when Cunningham would have been a full-time employee.
 Bryla, the company CEO, told PolitiFact that Cunningham "was not involved in the application for PPP funds and did not benefit from them."
 "The decision to pursue a PPP loan in order to help keep our employees on payroll was made at the board level and spearheaded by me and our CFO," Bryla told PolitiFact in an email. "Cal left company payroll on March 20, before the PPP loan application process even began, has not been on payroll since, and therefore was not among those on staff who have benefited from the loan, which has helped us maintain workers."
 On July 16, North Carolina GOP Chairman Whatley said Cunningham should call on WasteZero to release its PPP application. Doing so, he said, would prove he had no connection to the application.
 (A quick reminder about the PolitiFact rating process: when a person makes a claim, the burden of proof is on that person. The speaker is responsible for providing evidence to support their claim.)
 Cunningham and PPP
 Now let’s look at what Cunningham said about the PPP. Cunningham has mostly criticized the way the program was rolled out and its lack of oversight, not the existence of the program itself.
 In May, Cunningham told Spectrum News that the PPP money has "ended up in some of the wrong hands." He said:
 "I think we need to focus on making sure small businesses can keep people on the payroll. And very important for North Carolina, a lot of women-owned and minority-owned businesses have been cut out of that very process. And finally, a very, very important – and it’s a priority I’ve been returning to time and again – we’re spending a lot of money. Necessarily in order to protect people in a time like this, there needs to be very robust accountability and oversight for how money is being spent."
 His campaign released a pair of press releases calling for more oversight. In a tweet and Facebook post on June 17, he referenced a story by Axios, saying:
 "For PPP loans to have ‘generally missed the industries and areas most heavily impacted by COVID-19’ is unacceptable. Leaving behind small businesses — and disproportionately those that are Black- and Latino-owned — harms communities. We need oversight."
 Also on June 17, Cunningham spoke during an online forum hosted by WRAL. He described himself as a "strong proponent of the interventions that are necessary to help keep our companies moving, keeping people on the payroll (through) measures like the Paycheck Protection Program."
 Cunningham also told CNN he is "very concerned" about the lack of "vigorous and meaningful mechanisms for oversight of federal stimulus money. He made similar comments to other outlets too, which the Tillis campaign referenced in their press release.
 Tillis, for his part, has also shared concerns about small business loans not getting to small businesses. Fox News host Dana Perino asked Tillis about the program during an interview on April 20.
 Perino played a clip of U.S. Sen. Rick Scott, a Republican from Florida who has also criticized the PPP rollout. In the clip, Scott says, "banks should be helping those who need it the most, not, you know, who helps them."
 After the clip is played, Perino asks Tillis if he shares Scott’s concerns. Tillis said:
 "Yeah, I do. I think part of the problem is that some of the smaller businesses -- they don’t have the resources necessarily to even get the baseline documents that were needed to apply for the loan. We have to make sure in this next trunch that we’re casting a wider net with the smaller businesses."
 Our ruling
 Tillis said "Cal Cunningham criticized (the Paycheck Protection Program) while his company benefitted."
 Cunningham criticized the PPP to the extent that it wasn’t reaching enough companies and lacked adequate oversight -- and he’s not alone. Republican senators, including Tillis, have expressed similar concerns.
 As for WasteZero being "his" company, Cunningham currently works for the company on a contract basis. Cunningham was not a founder. And PolitiFact is not aware of any ownership stake he has in the company. Furthermore, the CEO says Cunningham wasn’t involved in the PPP application, or the decision to pursue PPP funds.
 The tweet is partially accurate but leaves out important details. We rate this claim Half True.
The start of the school year has been engulfed in controversy around COVID-19 safety measures, such as mask requirements for students and vaccination mandates for staff. At one Washington state high school, safety measures for student athletes have become fodder for viral social media posts.
 On Aug. 24, a Facebook page called "Hold the Line" shared a screenshot of a headline claiming that unvaccinated student athletes at Eatonville High School, about 50 miles south of Seattle, were made to wear proximity monitors.
 The headline read: "EXCLUSIVE: Washington public school forces unvaccinated teens to wear ankle monitors," and continues, "A 15-year-old girl was allegedly forced to wear an ankle tracking monitor for volleyball practice at Eatonville High School in Washington state as a condition of participating in team sports."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The school is using proximity monitors for student athletes as a COVID-19 precaution, but the headline spotlighted in the post, with references to "unvaccinated teens" being "allegedly forced," leaves out some important context: The requirement applies to students and staff — whether or not they’re vaccinated — and only while they’re participating in the sport.
 What the full article says
 The article that appeared with the headline, published by the conservative Canadian publication Post Millennial, has also been picked up by several other online news outlets, and has led some users to compare the devices to ankle monitors designed for people who are incarcerated or on parole.
 The Post Millennial article claimed that a 15-year-old girl was told by her coach to put on an ankle tracking monitor for volleyball practice as part of a program designed for efficient contact tracing to prevent COVID-19 spread. 
 According to Post Millennial, the device — called TraceTag — would be used to maintain social distancing guidelines by notifying wearers when they are too close to someone else and passively collecting interaction records for contact tracing should someone test positive for COVID-19 later on.
 The article’s headline was later changed to "EXCLUSIVE: Washington public school forces student athletes to wear ankle monitors for purposes of COVID segregation: parents."
 PolitiFact was not able to identify the student mentioned in the article, but a press release from Eatonville School District clarified the policy: Proximity monitors are being used for "high contact and moderate indoor contact sports."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "The proximity monitor contains radio-based sensors that track distance between individuals wearing the device, as well as length of time spent in proximity to one another," a school athletics FAQ webpage explained. 
 The monitors were purchased with grants to support athletic programs. 
 Administrators and coaches invited parents to a meeting and gave them a consent form prior to the start of the fall athletics season, but the school also suggested that "numerous changes" to the system can be expected throughout the year. The school’s fall athletics season began on Aug. 23.
 The FAQ page said the school decided to use proximity monitors to keep track of contacts so that athletes and coaches would not have to quarantine unnecessarily. 
 "If a student or coach tests positive, we will have immediate information regarding athletes’ and coaches’ contacts, so we can more tightly determine who might need to quarantine," Gary Neal, the superintendent of Eatonville School District, explained.
 How the TraceTag device works
 The TraceTag device, made by the workplace technology firm Triax, is not a location tracker like the kind used in corrections settings.
 The small device, which can be clipped to a hat or strapped to the body, has two functions: It emits an audible alert when people are within six feet apart, and records that information passively. That data, which can be anonymized, can subsequently be connected to a dashboard for an administrator to review.
 TraceTag doesn’t track location or movements, the company explained, but rather records interactions between two like devices. 
 Our ruling
 A headline shared on Facebook says a high school in Washington state is forcing unvaccinated student athletes to wear ankle monitors to play indoor sports.
 The school is making staff and students, whether or not they are vaccinated, wear proximity monitoring devices while they are participating in high to moderate-contact indoor sports, as a COVID-19 safety measure to aid social distancing and contact tracing. The devices do not track location.
 The headline leaves out key context from the article, and leaves the impression that the requirement applies only to unvaccinated students. We rate this claim Half True.
An article shared on Facebook questions whether the count of COVID-19 patients is inflated, saying hospitals have a financial incentive to claim that a patient has the virus.
 "Hospitals get paid more to list patients as COVID-19 — 3 times as much if put on ventilator," the story’s headline states.
 The article was posted on WorldNetDaily, a conservative news website. It was produced by The Spectator, which describes itself as a conservative publication. The Spectator reported on comments made by Dr. Scott Jensen, a Minnesota physician and Republican state senator, in an interview with Fox News host Laura Ingraham.
 The article was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 Jensen said on Fox News that doctors are being encouraged to cite COVID-19 as a cause of death on death certificates and he suggested that money is a motivation.
 Medicare has determined that a hospital gets paid $13,000 if a COVID-19 patient on Medicare is admitted and $39,000 if the patient goes on a ventilator, he claimed.
 Jensen did not respond to our request for information.
 The federal government has decided to pay hospitals more for treating COVID-19 patients. But it isn’t a windfall in the way the headline suggests. And there is no indication that hospitals are over-identifying patients as having COVID-19. If anything, evidence suggests the illness is being underdiagnosed. 
 How Medicare pays hospitals
 Medicare pays for inpatient hospital stays using a diagnosis-related group (DRG) payment system. The hospital assigns a code to a patient at the time of discharge, based mainly on the patient’s main diagnosis and treatment given. 
 Medicare then pays the hospital a prescribed amount of money — regardless of what it actually cost the hospital to provide the care. The amount can vary in different parts of the country to account for labor costs and other factors.
 The amounts 
 The dollar amounts Jensen cited are roughly what we found in an analysis published April 7 by the Kaiser Family Foundation, a leading source of health information. (Kaiser Health News, which partners with PolitiFact on health fact-checking, is an editorially independent program of the foundation.)
 There isn’t a Medicare diagnostic code specifically for COVID-19. Using payment rates for similar respiratory conditions, Kaiser estimated the average Medicare payment at $13,297 for a less severe hospitalization and $40,218 for hospitalization in which a patient is treated with a ventilator for at least 96 hours. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "A COVID patient on a ventilator will need more services and more complicated services, not just the ventilator," said Joseph Antos, scholar in health care at the American Enterprise Institute. "It is reasonable that a patient who is on a ventilator would cost three times one who isn't that sick."
 Medicare will pay hospitals a 20% "add-on" to the regular DRG payment for COVID-19 patients. That’s a result of the CARES Act, the largest of the three federal stimulus laws enacted in response to the coronavirus, which was signed into law March 27.
 "This is no scandal," Antos said. "The 20% was added by Congress because hospitals have lost revenue from routine care and elective surgeries that they can't provide during this crisis, and because the cost of providing even routine services to COVID patients has jumped."
 Julie Aultman, a member of the editorial board of the American Medical Association’s AMA Journal of Ethics, told PolitiFact it is "very unlikely that physicians or hospitals will falsify data or be motivated by money to do so."
 "There are strict policies for reporting and, quite frankly, healthcare workers are only focusing on helping their patients and doing as much as they can with little resources," said Aultman, who is director of the medical ethics and humanities program at Northeast Ohio Medical University. "Ohio is reporting confirmed and suspected cases and so this is how our providers are responding to their patients -- they are being very transparent about confirmed versus suspected."
 Indications of COVID-19 undercounts
 As for the suggestion that there is an overcount of COVID-19 cases, "the data has suggested that, in fact, there’s a significant undercount of deaths due to COVID," Jennifer Kates, the Kaiser Family Foundation’s director of global health & HIV policy, told PolitiFact.
 Here are some of those indications:
 Strict federal definition: Until April 14, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention counted as COVID-19 deaths only those in which the coronavirus was confirmed in a laboratory test — even as testing was not widely available; now, CDC counts probable cases and deaths. The day the change was announced, New York City’s COVID-19 death tally soared by more than 3,700 when it included in its total the deaths of people who were suspected of having COVID-19 but were never tested. 
 Surge in total deaths: The Economist reported on "excess mortality," which is the gap between the total number of people who died from any cause during a given period, and the historical average for the same place and time of year. In New York City, for the four-week period ending March 28, there was an excess of about 1,400 deaths, compared with 1,100 official COVID-19 fatalities.
 Our ruling
 A post shared on Facebook claims hospitals have a financial incentive to claim patients had COVID-19, saying payment is three times higher if a patient goes on a ventilator. An article the post links to includes comments from a doctor who suggests the number of coronavirus cases is being padded.
 It is standard for Medicare to pay roughly three times more for a patient with a respiratory condition who goes on a ventilator than for one who does not. That has nothing to do with the coronavirus.
 As part of a federal stimulus bill, Medicare is paying hospitals 20% more than standard rates for COVID-19 patients.
 Indications are that due to a lack of testing and other factors, the number of coronavirus cases has been undercounted, not padded.
 For a statement that is partially accurate, our rating is Half True.
U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey wants the president to reopen the economy, and in an interview with Politico, he said he sees clear signs that the country is ready – even as top public health officials studying the coronavirus warn against moving too quickly.
 "In a matter of days, and in some cases the moment may even have passed, that we’ve reached the peak of the rate of infections," said Toomey, a Republican from Pennsylvania.
 We wondered whether the number of new cases reported each day has subsided and whether case counts are likely to stay down if the economy roars back to life like Toomey wants.
 Toomey is right that the coronavirus crisis in the U.S. has begun to stabilize.
 On Monday, states reported at least 1,500 new fatalities, a figure below last week’s running tally of roughly 2,000 deaths every 24 hours. And the number of new cases reported Monday – about 23,000 – was also well below last week’s trend of 30,000 to 50,000 new cases each day.
 These signs led a coalition of mostly Democratic governors on the east and west coasts to announce plans to coordinate the reopening of their economies. But even as they announced their pacts, the governors offered no timeline for ending the lockdowns that have kept the vast majority of more than 100 million residents of their states stuck at home.
 Toomey relied on a statement made last week by Pennsylvania Department of Health Secretary Rachel Levine when he made his claim about reaching the outbreak’s peak, said Steve Kelly, a spokesman for the senator. Levine said she believes Pennsylvania has enough hospital beds, ICU beds and ventilators to meet demand but that "we’re watching that data very closely."
 Data compiled by her department shows that 41 percent of hospital beds, 39 percent of ICU beds and nearly 70 percent of ventilators across the state are still available, meaning Pennsylvania’s health care system is not at risk of being overrun. This is what makes the senator believe it’s time to reopen the economy in "a gradual and safe way," Kelly said.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Models created by a University of Washington global health research center indicate it’s been five days since the use of hospital resources peaked nationwide. But these models don’t account for the sort of relaxation of social distancing rules that Toomey and other Republicans are pushing for.
 Hospital capacity will be tested again once social distancing ends, and a new Washington Post analysis shows that in many parts of the country, including large swathes of Pennsylvania, it won’t hold up.
 A team of Post reporters analyzed the availability of critical care resources across the country using data sets assembled by Definitive Healthcare, an analytics company that mines government filings, including those of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, as well as commercial insurance claims.
 Imagining a scenario where the coronavirus infects two in 10 adults over the next year, the reporters found a patchwork of possible preparedness shortcomings in cities and towns where the full force of the virus has yet to hit and where people may not be following isolation and social distancing orders.
 The Post determined that more than half of the nation’s population lives in areas that are less prepared for the virus than New York City, where in early April officials scrambled to add more ICU beds and find extra ventilators amid a surge or coronavirus patients. Parts of Pennsylvania that border Maryland and Ohio would fall especially short, the Post found.
 Our ruling
 Making the case to reopen the nation’s economy, Toomey said, "In a matter of days, and in some cases the moment may even have passed, that we’ve reached the peak of the rate of infections."
 Data on coronavirus case counts and fatalities show that the country’s outbreak is subsiding. But Toomey’s comments don’t account for what will happen once social distancing ends.
 A new Washington Post analysis shows that hospitals in many parts of the country will be overrun, including large swathes of Pennsylvania, if two in 10 adults contract the virus over the next year.
 Toomey’s comments to Politico are partially accurate but leave out important details. We rate this statement Half True.
(Editors note: This fact-check was updated on Dec. 7, 2020, to include more detail on the government’s ability to take patents. The new information does not change our rating.)
 U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin called for change in the prices of a coronavirus drug, placing blame on the current administration for letting the prices rise so high. 
 Baldwin (D-Wisconsin) in a Nov. 19, 2020, tweet said Americans are paying the highest price in the world for a drug meant to combat the coronavirus pandemic, thanks to the Trump administration. 
 The drug, remdesivir, was the first medication released after the coronavirus pandemic began. It was developed by Gilead Sciences and largely funded with money from U.S. taxpayers, according to a July 23, 2020, article from PolitiFact. 
 The antiviral is designed to keep the virus from making copies of itself and spreading. A clinical trial in April found that patients who were given the drug recovered more quickly than those who were given placebo pills, but the study was not clear if the drug improved survival, according to an Oct. 15, 2020, report from the New York Times. 
 Attached to Baldwin’s tweet is a Nov. 16 letter to Alex Azar, the secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, requesting information on price negotiations with the company making the drug. The letter is signed by Baldwin, Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Massachusetts), Tina Smith (D-Minnesota), Bernie Sanders (D-Vermont), Chris Van Hollen (D-Maryland) and Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio). 
 The senators in the letter request that the federal government take over the production and distribution of the drug with compulsory licensing authority, which could be used to acquire lower-cost versions of the drug. 
 But is Baldwin right? Is the drug really more expensive in the U.S. than other countries?
 And are those prices the fault of President Donald Trump’s administration?
 Let’s break down the tweet. 
 Remdesivir costs are higher for Americans with private insurance
 Americans do pay more for remdesivir than people elsewhere.
 In a June 29, 2020 open letter from Daniel O’Day, the chairman and CEO of Gilead Sciences, said each dose of the antiviral medicine will cost $520 for those on private insurance in the U.S. For the entire treatment, consisting of six doses of the medicine, the cost is $3,120. 
 For those on government-sponsored insurance, such as Medicare and Medicaid, remdesivir will cost $390 per vial, or $2,340 per treatment, the letter said. That price will also apply to those in other countries with national health care systems. 
 Countries such as Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany have national health care systems. 
 So is the drug more expensive in the U.S.? 
 Yes, for people on private insurance in the U.S., the drug will cost more than what people in countries with national health care systems pay. 
 That’s similar to price trends with other drugs, though, said Cody Wenthur, an associate professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Pharmacy. 
 "U.S. drug prices have been calculated to be about four times higher on average than prices in other nations," he said. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Federal government has limited its ability to control drug prices
 And what about the claim that the Trump administration is at fault for the price of the drug?
 It’s not that simple.
 The president does have a small bit of influence, said Edmund Elder, the director of the Zeeh Pharmaceutical Experiment Station within the UW-Madison School of Pharmacy. The secretary of the U.S. Department Health and Human Services is a cabinet member, chosen by the president, and that department does oversee the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. And CMS negotiates drug prices for those receiving government-subsidized healthcare, setting a price that can dictate prices for the rest of the market as well, Elder said. 
 But the government is still not directly involved, because Congress doesn’t have the authority to tell companies — or the middle-man companies, called Pharmacy Benefits Managers — what to charge. 
 "They can’t say you can’t charge more for a drug," he said. 
 Wenthur said the federal government actually plays little direct role in the setting of prices for the general public because it implemented rules to limit its own ability to influence drug prices. Also, the federal government is only one actor in the realm that sets the prices of prescription drugs. Other actors include health insurance companies, large employers, or other payers, all of which are typically represented by a Pharmacy Benefits Manager. 
 But unlike other stakeholders in the process, the government can modify the rules of the system that determines prices, Wenthur said.
 "Whenever shortcomings in drug pricing or health care delivery are suggested to be the fault of any given administration, it generally implies that they haven’t been active enough in using their authority to optimize the system itself," he said. 
 When asked about the claim that Trump could lower prices, Baldwin’s office pointed to the letter, which notes the government could take over the production and distribution of the drug with compulsory licensing authority. That could be used to acquire lower-cost versions of the drug. 
 "The U.S. government frequently used this authority in the 1960s to acquire lower-cost versions of the on-patent drugs, and has used it to acquire patented military equipment," the letter says. "Some advocates have argued that using this authority could ‘provide adequate supply (of remdesivir) while pushing prices down.’"
 That power has not been used since the 1960s and 1970s, according to a 2017 study in the Yale Journal of Law & Technology, though there has been a renewed push to once again rely on compulsory licensing authority due to rising drug costs. 
 
 
 But, in a Nov. 25, 2020 opinion piece in The Hill, Sean O’Connor, a professor of law and the executive director at the Center for the Protection of Intellectual Property at George Mason University, said that by using compulsory licensing, the government would essentially be stealing the patent for remdesivir from Gilead. And while the company would be able to sue the government for full compensation if that were to happen, he said, the government is not authorized to infringe on patents any more than everyday individuals. 
 "Ultimately, drug prices are driven more by other factors in the health care system than by patent rights that incentivize lifesaving innovations," he said. 
 Pilar Ossorio, a professor of law and bioethics at UW-Madison said that while the U.S. government has the ability to "take" a patent and begin licensing a drug for production to drive down prices, it’s unlikely it will happen. 
 "I think as a policy matter (the government) sees the right of intellectual property as so powerful and useful in the development of inventions," she said, that the government would be highly reluctant to take such a step because it would discourage other companies from pursuing their own advances. 
 And, she said, because of the emphasis the U.S. has put on the importance of intellectual property rights, there is a chance the U.S. Supreme Court could invalidate portions of the code that allows the government to take patents. 
 Our ruling 
 Baldwin says Americans are paying more for remdesivir than people in other countries, and the Trump Administration is to blame.
 The price element is correct. On average, Americans insured by private health insurance companies could be on the hook for an additional $780 over what people in countries with national health systems may pay. 
 But the blame element misses the mark.
 While Trump may have a slight influence over drug prices with his appointee to run the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, there is really no way for the administration to step in and tell Gilead to charge less for remdesivir without a change in federal laws or invoking a rarely used maneuver to effectively seize the patent from the company.
 We rate this claim as Half True.
Illinois’ entry into the second phase of its COVID-19 vaccination plan means many more residents are eligible, but not everyone agrees the state is prioritizing the right groups as vaccine demand still outpaces supply.
 In an image shared on Facebook and Twitter, the Illinois Republican Party said Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s "Hierarchy of Vaccine Priorities" puts prisoners, politicians, and college students into Phase 1B — the current vaccination phase — ahead of "individuals with high-risk health factors, and everyone else."
 
 Like other states, Illinois’ vaccination plan is modeled from federal guidelines, but states aren’t required to uniformly implement the non-binding guidance.
 So we decided to take a look at the groups the state GOP claimed are now eligible in Illinois. State lawmakers and inmates are now eligible, but college students are not.
 Prisoners and lawmakers can receive the vaccine
 Along with people 65 years or older and frontline essential workers, inmates are part of Illinois’ second vaccination phase, which began Jan. 25.
 Pritzker is no renegade on this.
 The Federal Bureau of Prisons is providing vaccines to inmates, and at least 13 other states have included the group in their first two vaccination phases, according to a comparison of state prioritization plans from the Kaiser Family Foundation.
 U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance says states may choose to vaccinate individuals living in congregate facilities — including prisons or jails — at the same time as frontline staff because of the increased risk of transmission in such close quarters.
 Pritzker’s administration also added Illinois lawmakers to Phase 1B on Feb. 3 following requests from some members of the General Assembly. The requests came after several people tested positive for the coronavirus during the House’s lame-duck session at the Bank of Springfield Center in January. Both the state House and Senate also canceled session days scheduled for February..
 State lawmakers in Colorado, Hawaii and Maryland are also being vaccinated in the second phase. Members of Congress have been receiving vaccines since the distribution began.
 Still not eligible are individuals with high-risk health conditions from ages 16 to 64 who are not frontline essential workers. Pritzker recently announced the group will be added Feb. 25, which would make Illinois the 18th state to include them in their first two phases, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation comparison. Chicago and suburban Cook County, which receive doses separately from the federal government, have opted out of the expansion because of supply shortages.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CDC guidelines say people younger than 65 years with high-risk medical conditions do not need to be prioritized until the next phase of eligibility, Phase 1C. That means the state remains in line with federal guidance.
 College students generally do not qualify
 There is nothing in the Illinois vaccination plan allowing college students as a group to qualify.
 A spokesperson for the Illinois Republican Party said its assertion that college students currently qualified for vaccinations was based on a WCIA-TV report in which a student is seen receiving the vaccine at the I Hotel Conference Center in Champaign.
 The report also identifies her as a medical student, which according to the Champaign-Urbana Public Health District puts her squarely into another group that is eligible — healthcare workers.
 Spokespeople for the Illinois Department of Public Health and the governor’s office confirmed college students who do not work in healthcare or another position covered in the current phases do not qualify.
 Our ruling
 The Illinois Republican Party says "Pritzker’s Hierarchy of Vaccine Priorities" puts prisoners, politicians and college students into Phase 1B, ahead of "individuals with high-risk health factors, and everyone else."
 It’s true inmates and state lawmakers currently qualify for vaccinations, and those under the age of 65 and others who are not frontline workers do not — including people with underlying health risks.
 But it’s not true college students as a group are eligible. College students may only receive the vaccine right now if they meet other qualifying criteria.
 The GOP’s post also ignores how the Pritzker administration’s prioritization plan for inmates and those with high-risk medical conditions is in line with federal guidance.
 We rate it Half True.
 
 HALF TRUE – The statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context.
 Click here for more on the six PolitiFact ratings and how we select facts to check.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell recently objected to the idea that the federal government would send money to help state and local governments dealing with high infection rates of Covid-19. The political affiliations of the elected leadership in these states, such as New York, California and Illinois did not go unnoticed by McConnell, a Kentucky Republican. "Stop the Blue State Bailouts," read a news release from McConnell’s office. He suggested in a radio interview that these states declare bankruptcy instead.
 New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, responded swiftly, calling McConnell’s bankruptcy suggestion "one of the really dumb ideas of all time." 
 Cuomo then claimed that New York sends more money to the federal government than it gets in return, and that McConnell’s state regularly gets "bailed out" by the rest of the country. 
 "He represents the state of Kentucky, okay?" Cuomo said at a recent press briefing. "When it comes to fairness, New York state puts much more money into the federal pot than it takes out. Okay? At the end of the year, we put into that federal pot $116 billion more than we take out. Okay? His state, the state of Kentucky, takes out $148 billion more than they put in." 
 "Senator McConnell, who’s getting bailed out here?" he said later. "It’s your state that is living on the money that we generate. Your state is getting bailed out. Not my state."
 We wondered if Kentucky gets $148 billion more from the federal government than it puts in, and if New York puts in $116 billion more than it takes out.
 SUNY report
 We approached Cuomo’s office, which said the governor was referencing an analysis from the Rockefeller Institute, published in January. The Rockefeller Institute of Government, part of the State University of New York, produced the report with support from Cuomo’s executive branch.
 The report found that New Yorkers sent $116 billion more than they received in benefits over fiscal years 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018, while Kentucky received $148 billion more than it sent over the same period. In each of those years, New York led all other states in sending more money to the federal government than it receives, a measure also known as the "balance of payments." Meanwhile, 42 other states received more from the federal treasury in 2018 than they contributed, according to the report.
 The Rockefeller Institute, using preliminary data, estimates that in the year ending on Sept. 30, 2018, New Yorkers sent $22 billion more to the federal government than they received, more than the amount sent by residents of the next two states that gave more than they got: New Jersey, with a deficit of $11.5 billion, and Massachusetts, with a deficit of $9.1 billion. When calculating the balance of payments on a per-person basis, New Yorkers paid $1,125 more than they received, more than all but three other states, according to the report.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A state’s balance of payments to the federal government can be affected by whether a state has military bases, defense contractors, or is home to a large population of federal workers, all of which require the federal government to spend money in that state. Also, the number of its residents that receive Social Security, Medicare, and welfare benefits, or whether a state is home to a lot of high-income households that pay more federal taxes, affects the balance of payments. In New York, the deficit between taxes paid and federal funds received is driven by high earners and businesses paying more in taxes, according to the Rockefeller Institute. 
 New York’s independently elected comptroller, Thomas DiNapoli, a Democrat, also tracks New York’s balance of payments. In January, DiNapoli found that in 2018 New York’s deficit was higher, and that Empire State taxpayers sent $26.6 billion more to Washington, D.C., than the state received in federal funds. Kentucky, meanwhile, received $29.9 billion more in federal funds than its taxpayers paid, DiNapoli found. The Comptroller’s Office analyzed New York’s balance of payments in federal fiscal year 2013, 2016, and 2017. The cumulative deficit in the balance of payments from 2013, 2016, 2017, and 2018 was $111.5 billion, according to the comptroller.
 "As in past years, the imbalance largely reflects New York’s comparatively high federal tax payments," DiNapoli wrote. "The State generated nearly $254 billion, 8% of the $3.2 trillion in federal tax receipts. By contrast, the $227 billion in federal spending the State received represented 6% of the nationwide total, virtually the same as New York’s share of the U.S. population."
 The late Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a Democrat who served from 1977 to 2001, brought attention to this imbalance of payments in a report he issued annually, known as "the fisc." In his 1985 report, for example, Moynihan found that New Yorkers had paid $2.1 billion more than the state received in federal funds during the previous year. 
 PolitiFact fact-checked a similar claim in 2018, specifically that New York is a "donor state," and found it to be True. Our reporting then showed that in a system of progressive taxes, where wealthier people pay more, and that money is redistributed to people in need, it’s not unusual that states with wealthy residents give more than they get.
 Our ruling
 Cuomo said that "at the end of the year," New York puts $116 billion more into the federal treasury than the state receives in federal funds, while Kentucky receives $148 billion more than it contributes.
 Cuomo was referencing figures from a report from the Rockefeller Institute, which has been widely cited.
 However, a listener to Cuomo’s news conference would likely think that these figures represent yearly contributions. They are actually four-year cumulative totals contained in the Rockefeller Institute analysis.
 We rate this claim Half True.
An attack ad claims that the American Rescue Plan includes money for a bridge connecting Canada to New York, an underground rail project in Silicon Valley, museums and Native American language preservation, Amtrak, environmental justice grants and family planning organizations like Planned Parenthood.
 The ad is in response to President Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan for tackling COVID-19 and related economic challenges. It includes a $1,400-a-person stimulus payment, enhanced unemployment insurance, and a boost for coronavirus vaccination and testing efforts.
 It’s also loaded with pork, according to a group founded by Nikki Haley, the former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and potential contender for the presidency in 2024.
 The attack is made in a Facebook post from Stand for America and is headlined, "Democrats’ COVID ‘Stimulus’ Bill Wishlist." It lists six figures, ranging from $1.5 million to $1.5 billion, for spending on things such as underground rail, Amtrak, Native American language preservation, environmental justice and family planning. 
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 H.R.1319 does include some of the projects as described, but the post lacks context. For example, the largest of the six — $1.5 billion for Amtrak — was also requested by the Trump administration to help the railroad operate during the pandemic.
 Stephen Ellis, president of Taxpayers for Common Sense, points out that the amounts in the post account for about $2.2 billion of the $1.9 trillion bill, or about 0.1%.
 We sent messages to Stand for America via Facebook and its website asking for information to back up the Facebook post, but did not get a reply.
 The six parts of the claim
 
 "$1.5 million for a bridge connecting Canada to New York"
 Correct. But the Trump administration made the same request.
 The bill would give $1.5 million to the Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corp. "to prevent, prepare for and respond to coronavirus by conducting the operations, maintenance and capital infrastructure activities of the Seaway International Bridge," which connects New York State and Ontario.
 In May 2020, the Transportation Department asked for the same amount of money for the bridge because toll revenue had "dramatically decreased" due to decreased traffic from the pandemic, the New York Daily News reported.
 "$100 million for underground rail project in Silicon Valley"
 Correct.
 The bill allots $1.25 billion for federal transit capital investment grants. It does not specify a project in the Silicon Valley. 
 Stand for America cites a Fox Business news article that says the language of the bill alludes to $112 million going to phase two of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) expansion. The Washington Post also reported that it’s estimated the expansion will receive about $112 million.
 The long-planned six-mile extension would include five miles in a subway beneath downtown San Jose, with construction expected to start in 2022 and the line carrying passengers in 2030, according to the San Francisco Chronicle. The newspaper says the project’s stimulus funding would be $141 million.
 "$500 million for museums & Native American language preservation"
 Largely correct.
 The bill "would appropriate $480 million for grants to fund activities related to the arts, humanities, libraries and museums, and Native American language preservation and maintenance," according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office.
 The bill appropriates the $480 million this way: 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 $270 million — split between the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts — to provide grants "to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from the coronavirus."
 
 
 $200 million to the Institute of Museum and Library Services to carry out the Library Services and Technology Act.
 
 
 $10 million in "emergency grants" to "ensure the survival and continuing vitality of Native American languages during and after the (COVID-19) public health emergency."
 
 
 Museums have been financially disadvantaged by COVID-19, according to a survey of 850 museum directors by the American Alliance of Museums. The Metropolitan Museum of Art recently made news when its director said it was considering selling artwork to cover operational expenses.
 "$1.5 billion for Amtrak, which still has $1 billion in unspent aid"
 The $1.5 billion is correct. But it follows similar aid provided by the Trump administration. (The articles that Stand for America cites don’t address whether Amtrak has unspent aid.)
 The bill would steer grants totaling $1.5 billion to the National Railroad Passenger Corp. (Amtrak) "to prevent, prepare for and respond to coronavirus": $820.4 million for the northeast corridor and $679.6 million for the national network.
 In April 2020, Trump’s transportation department announced it was making more than $1 billion available to Amtrak "to support the railroad’s activities to prevent, prepare for and respond to the spread of" COVID-19.
 "$50 million for environmental justice grants"
 Correct.
 The bill appropriates to the Environmental Protection Agency $50 million for "grants, contracts and other agency activities that implement the environmental justice purposes and objectives" described in "Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations," an executive order signed by President Bill Clinton in 1994; and President Joe Biden’s "Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad" executive order. 
 Biden’s order amended Clinton’s order to create a White House Environmental Justice Interagency Council to "develop a strategy to address current and historic environmental injustice."
 "$50 million for ‘family planning’ orgs like Planned Parenthood"
 Largely correct.
 The bill appropriates $50 million "for making grants and contracts under" the Public Health Service Act, which gives grants and contracts for family planning. 
 No organization is specified.
 The National Family Planning & Reproductive Health Association issued a statement praising the $50 million for Title X.
 We rated as a Promise Kept Trump’s pledge to defund Planned Parenthood. His administration enacted a rule that effectively said that any facility receiving federal Title X funding cannot also be an abortion provider. Previously, abortion providers such as Planned Parenthood could receive Title X funds as long as the funds were only used for non-abortion services.
 Biden on Jan. 28 directed the Health and Human Services Department to consider whether to rescind the rule.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post claimed: "Democrats’ COVID ‘stimulus’ bill wish list" includes money "for a bridge connecting Canada to New York"; an "underground rail project in Silicon Valley"; museums and "Native American language preservation"; Amtrak; "environmental justice grants"; and "‘family planning’ organizations like Planned Parenthood."
 The figures listed in the post for six components of Biden’s $1.9 trillion relief bill are largely accurate.
 But the post needs additional information. For example, the largest of the six — $1.5 billion for Amtrak — was also requested by the Trump administration. And the six components comprise a tiny fraction of the $1.9 trillion.
 We rate the post Mostly True.
Wisconsin’s response to the coronavirus outbreak is under a microscope as cases surge and Republicans and Democrats continue to clash over what -- if anything -- to do about the increase.
 Tensions boiled over July 30, 2020 after Democratic Gov. Tony Evers issued a statewide face mask mandate, despite opposition from Republicans who contend the move amounts to government overreach. 
 In the days before that, though, the state Senate’s Democratic Committee turned its frustration toward Republican lawmakers.
 "While neighboring states like Minnesota, Illinois and Michigan have already implemented safety precautions like requiring individuals to wear masks, similar pleas in Wisconsin have fallen on deaf ears of Republican legislators," stated a July 24 news release.
 Lawmakers in those states have passed more COVID-19-related bills than Wisconsin’s Republican-controlled Legislature since the pandemic began. But some precautions, like a mask mandate, came from executive orders and not legislation. 
 How does the committee’s claim stack up?
 What Wisconsin has done (or not) 
 Eric LaGesse, executive director of the Senate’s Democratic committee, did not respond to PolitiFact Wisconsin’s request for evidence to back up their claim. But the claim is pretty straightforward, and there has been a lot of news coverage of the state’s response to the pandemic. Here’s a recap:
 In March, Evers and Health Services Secretary Andrea Palm issued a series of orders to curb large gatherings as COVID-19 began to emerge in Wisconsin. Those actions culminated in a stay-at-home order on March 24, 2020, which shut down the state to help contain the virus’ spread.
 In April, lawmakers passed a coronavirus relief package that allowed the state to tap into extra federal Medicaid dollars and suspended a one-week waiting period for collecting unemployment benefits, among other provisions. However, the state lost $25 million in federal funding for unemployment because Republican leaders waited too long to schedule a floor session on the relief package. 
 Evers’ administration extended the stay-at-home order on April 16 and four days later unveiled the Badger Bounce Back plan, which provided a phased approach for reopening based on testing and other public health criteria. In May, acting on a lawsuit from state GOP leaders, the state Supreme Court struck down much of the order and allowed the state to reopen without any protocols in place.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 After that, not much happened at the state level until the mask mandate despite a recent surge in infections and multiple daily increases of over 1,000 cases.
 Lawmakers have introduced 10 bills related to the pandemic in recent months, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported. The relief package we mentioned earlier is the only one that’s passed.
 What about our neighbors?
 The Democratic committee argued neighboring states -- specifically Illinois, Minnesota and Michigan -- have implemented more safety precautions for their residents.
 According to a database maintained by the National Conference of State Legislatures, Minnesota enacted 25 pieces of legislation related to COVID-19 through July 23 after lawmakers introduced over 200 measures. Illinois has passed 18, and Michigan approved 19. The bills touch on a wide range of issues, from COVID-19 testing to election procedures.
 The differences between Wisconsin and its neighbors can’t be blamed on partisan gridlock, either. While Democrats control Illinois’ state government, Minnesota’s legislature is split between both parties with a Democrat in the governor’s office. Michigan, like Wisconsin, has a Democratic governor and a Republican-controlled legislature. 
 It’s worth noting, though, that some of the precautions in other states came about through executive orders by their governors, not action by the legislature. Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzer, for example, issued an order on June 26 requiring residents to wear face coverings -- over a month before Evers enacted a mask mandate in Wisconsin. 
 Governors in other states also enacted stay-at-home orders similar to what Evers implemented.
 Our ruling
 Wisconsin’s state Senate Democratic Committee claimed Republican lawmakers have failed to act while "neighboring states like Minnesota, Illinois and Michigan have already implemented safety precautions like requiring individuals to wear masks."
 It’s clear that Wisconsin lawmakers are behind the curve on COVID-19 compared to neighboring legislatures. Legislative bodies in Minnesota, Illinois and Michigan have introduced and passed more bills since the pandemic began. 
 But they didn’t act alone, and safety precautions like mask mandates were ordered by their governors. 
 That leaves us with a statement that’s accurate but needs clarification or additional information.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
In the earliest days of the coronavirus outbreak, when public officials scrambled to close schools and businesses, a Facebook user lamented the inequity of the quarantine that Gov. Tom Wolf had imposed on Pennsylvanians.
 "The poor are, ironically, the most likely to be employed in the industries deemed ‘essential’ while their upper-class peers are freed to bunker down for weeks until the first death wave passes," the Facebook user wrote on March 18.
 We wondered whether this claim would hold up when we looked at the data.
 Starting with Wolf’s executive order forcing all non-life-sustaining businesses to close, we pulled U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics information on the number of Pennsylvania workers in each essential industry and calculated their average annual wages.
 The Facebook user is right. The vast majority of life-sustaining workers earn low and working-class wages.
 A quarter of Pennsylvania’s essential workers make less than $30,000 annually, and two-thirds make less than the state’s household median of $60,000, raising questions about whether the people keeping the rest of society afloat are being sufficiently protected and compensated.
 Grocery stores employ one of the largest groups of workers making the lowest wages. There are more than 120,000 grocery store workers in Pennsylvania, the data shows, and average annual wages for the sector are about $23,000. Gas stations, assisted living centers and building maintenance firms are among the other essential businesses employing large numbers of low-wage workers across the state.
 Philadelphia-area grocers including Giant, Acme and Aldi recently started limiting the number of shoppers allowed in their stores at once to protect workers.
 Still, across the country, dozens of grocery clerks have already been sickened with the virus. And a Trader Joe’s worker in Scarsdale, N.Y., a greeter at a Giant store in Largo, Md., and two Walmart employees from the same Chicago-area store have died from the coronavirus in recent days.
 Acknowledging how vulnerable essential workers are, Wolf recently announced new rules aimed at preventing the virus from spreading in businesses open to in-person customers. Grocery stores must now make all workers and customers wear masks and start taking employees’ temperatures if a worker tests positive.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But even as the state rolled out these new protections, it hasn’t done any more to ensure that the workers Wolf deemed essential are fairly compensated besides asking employers to step up and do the right thing. Wolf called fair pay for essential workers "the responsibility of the private sector."
 Among the grocers that operate in the Philadelphia area, several chains, including Trader Joe’s, Whole Foods, Wegmans, Fresh Grocer, Giant Eagle and Acme have started offering workers bonuses or higher hourly wages to their workers because of the coronavirus outbreak.
 The second part of the Facebook post addresses the perk the user believes white collar workers have enjoyed since Wolf ordered millions of Pennsylvanians to stay at home – the freedom to work from home.
 Federal data from a Bureau of Labor Statistics survey on the share of workers who say they’re able to telecommute shows a stark divide among industries, The Washington Post reported
 About 60 percent of people who said they work in "management, business and financial operations" said they can work from home. But fewer than 10 percent of workers said they could do so in categories such as "services," "construction and extraction," "installation, maintenance and repair," "production" and "transportation and material moving."
 The Post also found divisions along race and class lines.
 Thirty-seven percent of Asian Americans and 30 percent of whites said they could work remotely. But only 20 percent of African Americans and 16 percent of Hispanics said they had that ability. Almost 52 percent of those with a college education or higher said they could work from home, but only 4 percent of those with less than a high school diploma said they could.
 Our ruling
 The Facebook post stated that the poor are the most likely to be employed in essential industries while workers who earn more are free to shelter at home until the outbreak subsides.
 Our data analysis shows that the vast majority of workers Wolf deemed essential earn low and working class wages, and a recent analysis by The Washington Post shows that many white collar workers say they’re able to telecommute. For these reasons, we rate the Facebook post True.
 An earlier version of this article excluded several Philadelphia-area grocers that have offered employees bonuses or higher salaries.The story has been updated.
The protests against stay-at-home orders in some state capitals have drawn comparisons to the 2010 tea party movement, but the idea of protesting such rules amid a pandemic is not just a 21st-century phenomenon.
 There are parallels to a protest a century ago.
 "During the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, several influential San Francisco residents including a few physicians formed the Anti-Mask League which objected to wearing masks to prevent the spread of influenza," stated an April 22 Facebook post. "They held meetings of thousands of maskless people. San Francisco was ultimately one of the cities that suffered the most with a high death rate."
 (The "Spanish flu" is a misnomer — it’s more accurate to refer to it as the flu pandemic of 1918.)
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The post includes a black-and-white photo of policemen wearing masks over their mouths and noses. We did a reverse Google search and found the image matches a photo of policemen in a different city — Seattle — wearing masks in 1918.
 But there are accurate statements in the text, which draws from a source at the University of Michigan. We found that there was such a thing as the Anti-Mask League in San Francisco in January 1919. The city did have one of the highest death rates from the flu, but the authors said they can’t prove whether the Anti-Mask League played a role.
 RELATED: What the 1918 flu pandemic shows us about social distancing
 San Francisco mask protest in 1918
 Hat tip to NPR reporter Tim Mak for digging up the history of the Anti-Mask League and sharing it in a Twitter thread. Mak pulled from an essay by J. Alexander Navarro at the University of Michigan Center for the History of Medicine, a book by Alfred W. Crosby, America’s Forgotten Pandemic and the San Francisco Chronicle archives. 
 As the number of flu cases rose in October 1918 in San Francisco, the city passed an ordinance requiring everyone to wear a mask in public except at mealtime.
 Mask wearing was promoted as a symbol of patriotism. Gov. William Stephens told Californians it was a "patriotic duty for every American citizen" to wear a mask.
 City officials and local newspapers reported widespread compliance with the mask order initially, Navarro found. But some resisted the rules, and police arrested 110 people on Oct. 27 for not wearing their masks or for failing to keep them properly adjusted. The majority were fined $5, though some went to jail. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steve Kirsch
 
 
 stated on November 9, 2021 in an article
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Gavin Newsom is out of sight likely because he has Guillain-Barre syndrome from his booster shot.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Monique Curet • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In November, with cases declining, the city started to lift restrictions, although it still required masks. People flocked to public venues including theaters and sports arenas. At a boxing match, the city’s mayor and city health officer were photographed not wearing masks, for which they were fined.
 Later that month, the mayor annulled the ordinance. But new cases quickly emerged, and the mask ordinance was reinstated in January.
 Opponents formed the Anti-Mask League, multiple news articles in January 1919 show. Crosby wrote in his book that the league consisted of "public-spirited citizens, physicians and fanatics."
 At a meeting of the Anti-Mask League "resolutions were passed denouncing the mask ordinance as contrary to the desires of the majority of the people," the San Francisco Examiner reported. Nearly 2,000 people attended.
 
 
 The league got their wish, and the mask rule was rescinded Feb. 1.
 San Francisco was among the hardest-hit cities
 Navarro and colleagues studied how 43 cities fared during the 1918 pandemic and published their results in the Journal of the American Medical Association. They found that many cities experienced second waves after ending social distancing. 
 San Francisco had one of the higher excess-death rates: 673 per 100,000 people.
 "It is impossible to say for certainty that the advent of the Anti-Mask League played a role in that outcome," Navarro told PolitiFact "Undoubtedly, having over 2,000 people gather would have helped continue to spread influenza."
 The main factors in San Francisco’s outcome, however, were failure to implement interventions such as social distancing quickly and failure to keep them in place long enough.
 Navarro said he didn’t find something similar to the Anti-Mask League in other cities. Only a few other cities implemented mandatory face mask orders, while others recommended that the public use masks. 
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post said during the 1918 flu pandemic, San Francisco residents formed an "Anti-Mask League." San Francisco "was ultimately one of the cities that suffered the most with a high death rate."
 Residents angry about the reinstatement of a mask order did form the Anti-Mask League in January 1919. It appeared to be short-lived, as the mask rule was quickly rescinded. Researchers found that San Francisco did have one of the higher death rates in the country, but it is impossible to say whether that was directly related to the mask protests.
 A photo of masked police officers that accompanies the post is real, but it shows officers in Seattle.
 We rate this statement Mostly True.
The debate over when to re-open Wisconsin has escalated quickly.
 Frustration with the extended quarantine is mounting on social media, and residents around the state have defied social distancing orders to attend rallies demanding Gov. Tony Evers ease restrictions.
 Protesters say the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed enough to justify reopening, given the mounting economic and health impacts.
 One viral Facebook post — making the case to move toward re-opening the state — says we need to get used to living in a world with COVID-19.
 It was posted April 26, 2020, by Dr. David Murdock, a research cardiologist with the Aspirus health system in Wausau who was placed on leave after attending an April 19, 2020, re-open rally in Mosinee.
 "The consensus medical view is that this virus is here to stay. In other words, this virus cannot be defeated simply by staying inside for a couple of months," wrote Murdock, who said he was observing from the rear of the rally at a safe distance to gather material for a memoir. "The world will likely see periodic outbreaks, and we need to accept that and be prepared to deal with COVID long term."
 This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) 
 Murdock makes an array of points in the wide-ranging post, which has been shared more than 2,000 times. But we’re especially interested in the claim about the longevity of COVID-19.
 Of course, the "Safer at Home" order from Evers — and similar efforts across the country, including guidance from President Donald Trump — is not designed to eradicate the disease. It was implemented to slow the spread so hospitals aren’t overwhelmed. 
 Understanding that, we still wanted to examine the underlying claim.
 COVID-19 has sickened 3 million and killed more than 200,000 globally. Is it really here to stay?
 We asked the experts.
 Vaccine no guarantee to end COVID-19
 Many experts have said a true return to normalcy likely isn’t possible until a vaccine is widely available, which could be a year or more.
 "We're going to probably all need to be used to social distancing for the next 12 to 18 months," John Raymond, CEO of the Medical College of Wisconsin, said during an April 27, 2020, online briefing for the Greater Milwaukee Committee. "Until hopefully we have an effective vaccine, it's likely we're going to be living with COVID-19."
 But a vaccine doesn’t necessarily mean the end of COVID-19.
 Like much about this coronavirus, this isn’t something we can say for sure yet. But experts we talked to said complete eradication would be a major undertaking.
 "Absent a vaccine, I think it would quite likely become like seasonal flu or perhaps like some of the other coronaviruses that we are familiar with," said Bill Hanage, an associate professor of epidemiology at Harvard University’s School of Public Health. "It is entirely plausible that this could become part of our regular landscape of respiratory viraI infections."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The vaccine he references would be a theoretical one that is 100% effective and gives lifelong immunity. But vaccines are "almost never perfect," notes Barry Bloom, a professor of public health at Harvard.
 Bloom also expressed concern over the volume of misinformation about COVID-19 vaccinations on social media, which include a host of conspiracy theories about pushing people to vaccinate and concerns about how the vaccines may be dangerous. That could affect willingness to take a vaccine once it’s available.
 "The vaccine is only a tool if it’s used," Bloom said.
 What we don’t know
 Hanage said an array of key unknowns will determine the long-term future of COVID-19. They include:
 
 
 Whether people can get re-infected, and how severe those recurrences would be
 
 
 How much immunity results from minor infections
 
 
 How the summer warmup alters infectiousness (based on both people’s behavior and the reaction of the virus itself; generally coronaviruses don’t survive as long in warmer weather)
 
 
 Even if the virus does stick around, though, it may not be the threat it is today.
 "If that immunity is not very long-lasting — and we have good reason from other coronaviruses including the original SARS, that it won’t be — what type of infections will people have when their immunity starts to wane?" Hanage said. "The first thing to say is we don’t know, but I think it’s also plausible to suggest they might be milder."
 It’s worth noting that SARS — a disease caused by a coronavirus that killed 800 during a 2003 outbreak — has been eradicated. But there are key differences that make COVID-19 a more formidable foe.
 In a March 5, 2020, article for The Lancet medical journal, Annelies Wilder-Smith noted COVID-19 can be passed on by those with minor symptoms or none at all (SARS patients generally weren’t contagious until they had severe symptoms). And COVID-19 is more easily transmitted and has had a more prevalent community spread.
 "The virus remains, and we need to learn how to deal with it," Wilder-Smith, a professor of emerging infectious diseases at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine told PolitiFact Wisconsin. "Certainly lock-down is only a temporary solution whilst we gear up to provide the true solution. Yes, we need to prepare for this reality."
 Charles Branas, chair of the epidemiology department at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, told PolitiFact Wisconsin eradicating the virus like we did with smallpox "will be challenging, to say the least." Ali Khan, dean of the College of Public Health and professor of epidemiology at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, said COVID-19 sticking around is "likely, but not inevitable."
 Khan noted some countries already are attempting to eliminate the virus. China, New Zealand, Australia and Vietnam have all set a goal of not just containment, but elimination. The New York Times reported April 24, 2020 that the adjoining nations of Australia and New Zealand are seeing just a handful of new infections each day and closing in on their "extraordinary goal."
 Our ruling
 A widely shared Facebook post from a Wisconsin doctor said we need to face the reality that COVID-19 is "here to stay" and "we need to accept that and be prepared to deal with COVID long term."
 He was making the point that staying indoors for another month or two with extended shelter-in-place orders won’t get rid of the virus. (Though, as noted, the shelter-in-place orders are not meant to fully eradicate the virus.)
 Experts say it’s still too early to know this with complete certainty, since much remains unknown about the nature of immunity. And we have no clue how effective a future vaccine may be.
 But a best guess at this point is that COVID-19 could indeed stick around long-term, waxing and waning similar to the seasonal flu. Experts say there’s also reason to believe that lingering version could be less severe, though, a nuance Murdock did not address.
 Based on what we know now, we rate this claim Mostly True.
An unsourced but seemingly optimistic statistic on the survival rate of the novel coronavirus in the United States is making a splash on Facebook.
 "Current survival rate for COVID19 in the US is 98.54%. Let’s share this story. Positive vs. Panic," it reads.
 The post, which was shared in mid-April, was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The figure isn’t too far off from what databases are reporting right now in terms of the known fatality rate from the disease. But the figures from this developing pandemic are preliminary, and it’s important to note that the best calculations include people who are still sick — patients who have neither died nor recovered.
 Also, while a 98.5% survival rate might sound promising, it really isn’t. Even a 1% mortality rate (99% survival rate) would mean that a disease is 10-times more lethal than the seasonal flu. If everyone in the country contracted COVID-19, that rate would lead to about 3,300,000 American deaths.
 Let’s look at the numbers.
 Our World in Data, a collaboration between researchers at the University of Oxford and the nonprofit Global Change Data Lab, uses the case fatality rate to calculate the mortality risk of the disease. Case fatality rate is the ratio of confirmed deaths to confirmed cases. 
 Using that rate, the database shows that the current mortality rate in the U.S. is 5.9%, which puts the survival rate at 94.1%. Johns Hopkins University, which uses the same method, currently lists the U.S. rate at 6%.
 But even these researchers acknowledge that during a pandemic, the rate of case fatalities is a "poor measure of the mortality risk of the disease." That’s partly because the actual number of cases is hard to determine without widespread testing.
 "One, it relies on the number of confirmed cases, and many cases are not confirmed; and two, it relies on the total number of deaths, and with COVID-19, some people who are sick and will die soon have not yet died," Our World in Data researchers wrote in an article. "These two facts mean that it is extremely difficult to make accurate estimates of the true risk of death." 
 Dr. Michael Mina, an assistant professor of epidemiology at Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health, said that the ability to calculate accurate recovery rates hinges on having access to credible data. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "The survival rate depends on how well we understand the denominator," Mina wrote in an email. "We need to be looking at denominators from good serological surveillance to know the true numbers infected. Additionally, we should consider the infection fatality rate in the context of demographics like age." 
 Infection fatality rate is the number of total deaths from a disease divided by the total number of cases — as opposed to the confirmed deaths and cases. 
 Mina also explained that the data varies sharply when looking at a weighted average of fatality rates for specific age groups: "So, a one-number-fits-all value for the infection fatality rate doesn’t really make too much sense given the major skew in the data."
 Even the 94% rate is a flawed statistic amid an ongoing pandemic. Data is incomplete and government agencies and organizations vary in how they collect and report it. 
 Rates that include "total cases" or "confirmed cases" should also be considered preliminary, because many outcomes aren’t known yet: These patients may recover, or they might not.
 We did find one coronavirus tracking database that singles out the number of deaths among resolved U.S. cases that have had outcomes.
 Worldometer, a private statistical resource that collects data from official reports, shows that about 289,100 COVID-19 cases in the United States are considered closed as of May 7, 2020.
 Of those, around 213,500 people have recovered, and about 75,500 have died, according to the database. This represents a 74% survival rate. But this, too, may be off and will continue to fluctuate daily.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post says the "current survival rate for COVID-19 in the US is 98.54%."
 This is problematic for several reasons. In an ongoing pandemic with incomplete numbers, mortality rates should be viewed with caution. There are a slew of factors to take into account such as variations among demographic groups that skew data, a lack of testing, and the number of active cases. 
 Even discounting these factors, based on current projections, the 98.54% figure is incorrect. If you include all the confirmed cases, the number is about 94%. And while both numbers may sound high, they indicate a fatality rate that is more than 10 times that of the seasonal flu. 
 Ultimately, declaring an accurate U.S. survival rate will be difficult until most cases are resolved and more complete and accurate data is released.
 For a statement that is partially accurate but leaves out important information, we rate this Half True.
Do the Kiwis have something exceptional to show the world on how to fight COVID-19?
 A Facebook account called "God" with more than 3.94 million followers shared an image of a tweet that made this claim:
 "today i learned that new zealand let health experts make the decisions about how to deal w the pandemic rather than politicians and as of today they have 0 covid cases. wow almost as if science and common sense works."
 The July 7 post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The country has earned headlines such as, "New Zealand has ‘effectively eliminated’ coronavirus" in National Geographic and "How New Zealand beat the coronavirus" in Politico. 
 So, let’s see what’s happening there.
 The numbers
 The number zero is accurate in terms of the number of active cases in which the coronavirus was contracted within New Zealand. 
 In fact, the New Zealand Ministry of Health told PolitiFact on July 9 it had been 69 days since the last case of COVID-19 was confirmed as "acquired locally from an unknown source."
 This isn’t to say New Zealand, which has a population of 5 million, has had no cases.
 As of July 7, the date of the Facebook post, there were 22 active cases in the country — all detected at the port of entry among New Zealanders who were returning from overseas travel, the ministry told us. In total, the country has counted 1,540 confirmed and probable cases during the outbreak, including 22 deaths. 
 A probable case does not have a positive laboratory result, but "is treated like a confirmed case based on its exposure history and clinical symptoms."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health experts vs. politicians
 As for the whys of New Zealand’s success, both health experts and politicians can be credited — along with New Zealanders’ willingness to abide by stay-at-home orders — according to a number of news analyses.
 National Geographic credited New Zealand’s success to mandatory quarantines for all visitors beginning March 15, which it called one of the strictest policies in the world at the time — even though there were just six cases nationwide. Just 10 days later, it instituted a complete, countrywide lockdown, including a moratorium on domestic travel. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern "made clear, concise statements about the situation to the nation, bolstered by a team of scientists and health professionals" and citizens abided by the restrictions, wrote a reporter who became one of the quarantined visitors.
 How strict? The lockdown from March 24 to April 9 allowed non-essential workers to leave home only for essential exercise within close proximity to their residences, Forbes reported.
 "New Zealanders didn’t complain, they didn’t protest, they simply followed the rules," another foreign reporter who was in New Zealand for the lockdowns, wrote in Politico. When Ardern’s health minister took his family for a 20-minute ride to the beach, he was demoted, the reporter wrote.
 Ardern announced the reopening of schools in May.
 The BBC credited Ardern’s leadership as well as the presence of New Zealand Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield at Ardern’s daily briefings. Bloomfield effectively explained complex health issues, and that made New Zealanders more compliant in following orders, the network reported.
 The New York Times reported June 8, the day the New Zealand lifted its lockdown and declared the virus eliminated, that Ardern "has been praised internationally for her approach to New Zealand’s outbreak, which was among the most stringent in the world.
 "Her live video updates on Facebook, streamed from her own home, offered a relatable understanding of the impact of the coronavirus lockdown on the lives of New Zealanders, but a firm resolve to eradicate the disease from the country."
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post claimed that "New Zealand let health experts" rather than politicians make decisions about how to deal with COVID-19, "and as of today they have zero COVID cases."
 As of July 7, the date of the post, New Zealand reported having 22 active cases of COVID-19 — but each had been detected at the port of entry among people returning from travel abroad. In other words, the country had zero active, locally transmitted cases.
 Health experts, along with New Zealanders’ compliance with stay-home orders, are partly credited for the success. But Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern’s decisions to order strict early lockdowns, following scientists’ advice, have won wide praise.
 For a statement that is accurate but needs a little more information, our rating is Mostly True.
To put the size of a Democratic-proposed coronavirus relief bill into perspective, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi compared its costs with the debt she says was incurred by the Republican-backed 2017 tax bill. 
 Speaking to ABC News’ "This Week" host George Stephanopoulos about the Heroes Act, a $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill passed by the House in May, Pelosi said, "All of that money that is out there, and it is very significant, is half of what the Republicans put onto the national debt."
 We wondered if that’s accurate, so we reached out to Pelosi’s team to learn more about what she was referencing in her comment. We found that while her specific comparison has merit, it lacks context about the level of overall bipartisan support for measures that have added to the national debt.
 Let’s take a look. 
 Drew Hammill, Pelosi’s deputy chief of staff, told PolitiFact in an email that Pelosi was referring to the portion of the Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions Act that would provide aid to state and local governments. 
 The so-called Heroes Act, which aims to provide money to state and local governments, small businesses, and households, received the support of just one Republican, Rep. Pete King of New York, while 14 Democrats voted against it in the House. The Senate hasn’t taken up the bill.
 The legislation’s state and local aid would add $1.13 trillion to the deficit when calculated over a ten year period, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.
 Hammill said that Pelosi’s phrase, "half of what the Republicans put onto the national debt," refers to the impact of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which passed without a single Democratic vote in Congress and was signed by President Donald Trump. The Congressional Budget Office estimated in 2018 that the act would add $1.8 trillion to the deficit over 10 years, or more than $2.3 trillion including added interest expenses on the national debt.
 Using those figures, the state and local aid from the proposed coronavirus relief bill would cost 49% or 63% as much as the 2017 tax bill, depending on whether it's compared to the tax act estimate alone or with added interest. It gave tax cuts to corporations and individuals, and those cuts disproportionately benefit wealthier taxpayers.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Steve Ellis, president of Taxpayers for Common Sense, said in an email to PolitiFact that Pelosi’s statement sounded accurate.
 "If she was saying it how the speaker’s staff is characterizing it, yes, it is roughly half as much," Ellis wrote.
 However, the impact of the 2017 tax cut is still a projection and might be affected by the recession, Ellis said. 
 Pelosi’s statement is largely correct with respect to the tax cut bill, but it doesn’t tell the whole story of how other measures supported by both parties have contributed to increasing the national debt during Trump’s time in office. 
 All told, Trump has signed legislation that has added $4.7 trillion to the debt since 2017, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. That figure includes the 2017 tax bill, the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 ($445 billion), the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 ($1.7 trillion) and the 2019 spending deal that repealed Affordable Care Act taxes ($500 billion), among others. The 2018 and 2019 budget bills and the 2019 spending deal all received large numbers of both Democratic and Republican support. 
 Our ruling
 Referring to the proposed Heroes Act approved by the House, Pelosi said, "All of that money that is out there, and it is very significant, is half of what the Republicans put onto the national debt."
 Pelosi’s statement has merit in that the state and local aid proposed in the Democratic coronavirus relief bill amounts to about half of the projected 10-year deficits created by the Republican tax cuts in 2017.
 But it implies that Republicans alone are to blame for increases to the national debt. A broader look at legislation signed by Trump shows that both parties have supported legislation that has added to the national debt.
 We rate the statement Mostly True.
More than a year into the coronavirus pandemic, debate remains around a central means of combating the spread of COVID-19: To wear or not to wear a mask.
 At least the debate still exists among the general public and some politicians. Science and public health experts have pretty much all come down on one side: Mask up.
 That’s where newly-elected Superintendent of Public Instruction Jill Underly fell when asked for her opinion on school mask requirements during an interview April 11, 2021 on WISN’s "UpFront." 
 "As far as mitigating spread, they say that masks is the number one way to do so," Underly said. "And I feel that is, that's what we need to do to keep our buildings open. I think we should be wearing masks. But again, that's my recommendation, I believe in the science. But I do feel that each school district is going to have to make that decision for themselves." 
 Underly made the comment at a point when thousands of students in Milwaukee Public Schools and the Madison Metropolitan School District were returning to the classroom, at least on a hybrid basis, for the first time since the pandemic began. Most other other districts in the state had been operating in person for months, some from the start of the school year last fall.
 Still, there has been pushback against the decisions, including by the Milwaukee Teachers’ Education Association, the teacher’s union, which has questioned the safety of returning to in-person learning.
 Let’s focus on Underly’s claim about mask’s being the best way to mitigate COVID-19 spread.
 How does wearing masks rate?
 In February, we rated True a claim by Assembly Minority Leader Gordon Hintz, D-Oshkosh, that "we know mask mandates work. There’s enough evidence out there between counties that have done it and counties that haven’t."
 Nothing has changed since then in terms of the science behind the effectiveness of masks.
 But what about Underly’s claim that masks rank at the top of the mitigation list?
 When asked for backup for the claim, Erin Forrest of Underly’s transition team emailed a list of articles and studies related to the science behind masks, including a University of California San Francisco June 26, 2020 paper "Still Confused About Masks? Here’s the Science Behind How Face Masks Prevent Coronavirus" and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration "Face Masks, Including Surgical Masks, and Respirators for COVID-19."
 "It’s also important to note that right now there is no vaccine approved for people under 16 years of age," Forrest said in an email to PolitiFact Wisconsin. 
 But she did not cite any study that ranked the various methods for mitigating spread of the coronavirus. We could not find any either in our search. 
 That said, experts agree that mask wearing is a primary way to do so, albeit in conjunction with other steps, such as hand-washing, social-distancing and -- now that vaccines are available -- getting a shot.
 Ajay Sethi, an epidemiologist and professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, told us wearing a properly fitted mask is "imperative." 
 "Both masks and physical distancing are needed to interrupt transmission of the coronavirus in indoor environments," Sethi said in an email to PolitiFact Wisconsin. "When food or drink is being served for consumption, then maintaining proper physical distance is imperative. When maintaining physical distance is challenging, then wearing a high quality, properly fit mask is imperative. Ideally, both wearing masks and maintaining physical distancing are being done together."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 City of Milwaukee Health Commissioner Kirsten Johnson told us: "Masking is at the top of the list for the Milwaukee Health Department. Combined with vaccination, that is the best way to stop COVID." 
 That point is echoed in numerous other places.
 Harvard Medical School puts mask wearing at the top of its list of steps individuals can take. Yale Medicine includes it on its list, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued guidance April 6, 2021on improving the fit and filtration of masks that included this note: "Correct and consistent mask use is a critical step everyone can take to reduce their risk of getting and spreading COVID-19."
 Finally, the World Health Organization, in a Q&A posted on its website, notes that "masks are a key measure to suppress transmission and save lives."
 The website goes on to say:
 "Masks should be used as part of a comprehensive ‘Do it all!’ approach including physical distancing, avoiding crowded, closed and close-contact settings, good ventilation, cleaning hands, covering sneezes and coughs, and more."
 Our ruling
 Underly said for mitigating COVID-19 spread, "masks (are) the number one way to do so." 
 Experts at the local, national (CDC) and international (WHO) level, all say that masks are vital to lowering the risk of spreading COVID-19. That said, they also note simply wearing a mask is not enough and that other mitigation strategies, such as vaccination, social distancing and hand washing are also important. 
 And, for the most part, students cannot be vaccinated. The vaccines are only available to those 16 and older.
 We rate Underly’s claim Mostly True.
 PolitiFact: No, WHO didn’t just say you don’t need to wear a mask 
 PolitiFact: Mask skeptics ask questions. PolitiFact answers 
 PolitiFact: Masks for COVID-19 are effective, as a six-part Facebook takedown fails
Scientists have expressed cautious optimism that a vaccine will be ready in the spring of 2021 (and President Donald Trump has hinted at an even more aggressive timeline). But that has raised a key question: Does the federal government have a plan to distribute it?
 Former Vice President Joe Biden says no. 
 "If the vaccine came out tomorrow, how in the heck would we get it to people? There is no game plan they have," Biden told associations that represent Black and Hispanic journalists Aug. 6. "How would everybody in America have access to it? It is a gigantic problem to distribute, even if we have it, and that’s what we should be planning for now, not when we get it."
 The federal government has not yet released a plan about how it will distribute vaccines. But in the past two weeks, federal officials have spoken about vaccine distribution planning, including the role of the Defense Department. And committees are working on recommendations about how to distribute the vaccine, while the CDC asked a few to join a pilot program to plan for distribution.
 "There is no national COVID-19 vaccination distribution plan, yet. So that is true," said Michael Fraser, CEO of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials.
 Most of the experts we spoke with said the government’s efforts have been too slow, and states face too many unknowns to do their part in planning to vaccinate millions of people. 
 "This is going to be the most challenging, complex mass vaccination program ever attempted," said Dr. Kelly Moore, who works at the Immunization Action Coalition and ran Tennessee's H1N1 vaccination program.
 Two committees working on recommendations
 It’s not yet known precisely when the vaccine will be available to the public. Six vaccines are in the third phase of testing that involves thousands of patients. Like earlier phases, this one looks at the safety of a vaccine, but it also examines effectiveness and collects more data on side effects.
 Results of the third phase will be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration. After the FDA licenses the vaccine, recommendations will be given about who should get the vaccine, and distribution will follow, said Dr. Carol Baker, a pediatrician who is an alternate liaison to a COVID-19 vaccines working group.
 Federal health officials have generally predicted that the vaccine will be available in early 2021. 
 There are two committees working on recommendations for the CDC about vaccine distribution.
 The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, a long-standing committee at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, formed a COVID-19 vaccines working group in April. The group’s next meeting on Aug. 26 will be publicly live streamed. Recommendations about who should get the vaccine first are expected by the fall.
 The committee has wrestled with questions about whether to prioritize groups who have been infected at higher rates, such as Black and Latino people. Another difficult question is defining who is an essential worker. 
 "There is no right answer there," said Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine at Vanderbilt University, a liaison to the working group. "Grocery store workers vs. long haul truckers vs. people who work to keep the electrical grid up ... you can go on and on. Your priority list is valid, but so is mine."
 In July, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and the National Academy of Medicine formed a committee to help make a plan for vaccine distribution. 
 Some experts told us it’s unclear why there are two separate committees working on the same task, while others said the CDC group will be the key group to make recommendations to the CDC.
 
 Defense Department role
 One key question has been about Trump’s comments that the military would be involved with logistics of vaccine distribution, a first.
 Trump told reporters July 28 that the military is "all mobilized. It’s been fully set up. When we have that vaccine, it will be discharged and taken care of. It’ll be a very rapid process all over the country."
 But a McClatchy report the next day cast doubt on Trump’s statements. Two defense officials told McClatchy that the military commands most likely to be involved in a delivery strategy had not been asked to prepare one. A Health and Human Services official told McClatchy that military help may not be required at all, and it would be the exception, not the norm.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A Biden campaign spokesman pointed to the conflicting statements to argue that no distribution plan exists.
 Following McClatchy’s article, administration officials held a conference call with reporters about vaccination distribution. (For our fact-check, the White House and other administration officials directed us to the transcript of that press phone call.)
 A senior administration official said the Defense Department will handle the logistics of distribution and "kitting," which means the packaging of the vaccine, along with related equipment, including needles, syringes and vials. The CDC will handle tracking of patients following vaccination and communications with state health departments. 
 An official said that the distribution will be different from the seasonal flu vaccine because the government will actively target vulnerable groups, such as people in nursing homes and frontline health care workers.
 State role in planning for vaccine distribution
 Another key piece of vaccine distribution planning lies with the states. 
 The CDC launched a pilot program with North Dakota, Florida, California and Minnesota as well as the city of Philadelphia to work on a vaccination response, according to a letter written by Nancy Messonnier, a CDC official, Aug. 4. 
 While the letter says that the pilot program will be a model for other states, it doesn’t give states much time to receive and implement the best practices from that pilot program. 
 The states have until the end of September to develop vaccination plans that will then be reviewed by the CDC and Operation Warp Speed, the federal government’s effort to fasttrack the availability of vaccines. Those plans should include mass vaccination clinics, signing agreements with providers and identifying high-risk communities that will require additional outreach.
 "States must be allowed sufficient time to absorb what has been learned in these pilots and customize it to their own specific state and needs," said James Blumenstock, chief program officer for health security at the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials. "Everyone questions if all of that can be done successfully between now and Sept 30."
 States can build off of their existing programs to administer childhood vaccines and the seasonal flu shot, and the H1N1 vaccine in 2009. But the delivery of COVID-19 vaccine poses some additional challenges. For example:
 
 
 H1N1 was a single dose vaccine. The federal government has told states to prepare for a two-dose COVID-19 vaccine that will need to be administered likely three or four weeks later. 
 
 
 While about 90 million people received the H1N1 vaccine, the federal government is planning for 300 million people to receive COVID-19.
 
 
 Vaccines may have cold storage rules of around minus 80 degrees Celsius, far colder than other vaccines. "We’ve never distributed a vaccine that required that before," Moore said. "We don’t have a cold chain that exists currently that can take that."
 
 
 States have been directed to write plans for distribution without knowing important details about the vaccines and how much federal money they will receive to help with an unprecedented vaccination effort.
 "Vaccination planning efforts are not as far along as they should be if the first COVID-19 vaccines actually do become available for shipping as early as late 2020," Moore said. "Much of this delay has come from confusion at the federal level about who is directing the implementation of the national vaccination program. States cannot make firm plans with their private sector partners until these basic decisions are made at the federal level and until they are told how the federal government intends for vaccines to reach them."
 Our ruling
 Biden said that "if the vaccine came out tomorrow, how in the heck would we get it to people? There is no game plan."
 Biden is correct that there isn’t a detailed vaccine distribution plan written by the federal government at this time. But the vaccine isn’t coming out tomorrow, and a federal plan is in the works.
 There are committees working on recommendations for vaccine distribution to include which groups should get the vaccine first. The CDC also asked four states and a city to pilot a program for vaccine distribution. Nationwide, states are expected to submit their own vaccination distribution plans by the end of September to the federal government.
 There are a lot of unanswered questions that will affect vaccine distribution. But the planning is happening.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
The path toward bringing students back to real classrooms with teachers and desks and art in the hallways has taken many twists and turns. The Democrats’ massive COVID-19 relief bill has $125 billion to help schools bring their students back and make up for a troubled year.
 Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., had an amendment that would tie aid to how fully reopened a school was. When his amendment failed on a mostly party-line vote, Rubio tweeted his disdain.
 "Tonight, Democrats voted to send reopening money to schools that refuse to reopen," he wrote March 6.
 Tonight Democrats voted to send re-opening money to schools that refuse to re-open. https://t.co/aQgVBDTUzh— Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) March 6, 2021 
 Let’s unpack that.
 Rubio’s proposal
 The relief package provided money for a variety of purposes, including summer remedial education, student counseling, rebuilding ventilation systems and taking any steps needed to slow the spread of the virus.
 Rubio’s amendment would have tweaked the distribution formula for those billions in school aid. Under his proposal, every school district could count on getting 25% of whatever amount would be its share. (That share would be tied to the federal Title I funds the district normally received.)
 Beyond that 25%, "for each school day in a five-day school week" that district schools were open to 100% of their students, the district would get an additional 15% of its money. 
 "This amendment incentivizes us to get our kids back in school," Rubio said March 6 on the Senate floor. And he targeted one group that he felt stands in the way. 
 "We do have unions — and to be fair, not all — but we do have unions that say, ‘We're not going back until next year,’ even if all the (safety) measures are put in place," Rubio said.
 The limits to Rubio’s complaint
 Rubio chastised Democrats for voting to send reopening money to schools that refuse to open. But his criticism contains some misleading elements.
 Rubio’s term "refuse to reopen" casts schools as adopting a policy simply as a matter of preference. But many factors drive school closures. 
 Education researchers who have pulled together data on schools and the coronavirus found that schools that choose to reopen don’t necessarily stay open.
 The Center for Reinventing Public Education at the University of Washington has been tracking 477 school districts. Many of them began to bring students back at the start of the school year, but then reversed course. Between November and December, remote learning increased, by 7% in suburban communities and 20% in urban areas.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Several districts shifted toward more opening through the fall but seemed to pull back on these partial reopenings as the winter surge took hold," said center associate director Betheny Gross. 
 Tactical shifts in response to the virus make it difficult to define schools as ones that "refuse to reopen." 
 Gross said the great majority of schools seem to aim to reopen at least partially. Only about 7% relied solely on remote teaching for all grades in October, November and December.
 Rubio’s claim also simplifies the nature of the bill’s school aid. The $125 billion is aimed at much more than just reopening schools. With an eye on remedial teaching, it orders districts to reserve 20% of their funds for measures such as summer school, after-school tutoring and an extended school year. The school aid spans many years to sustain efforts to help students make up lost ground.
 We reached out to Rubio’s office and did not hear back.
 The Democratic school reopening policy
 Rubio’s comment suggests that returning kids to school is a low priority among Democrats.
 In January, President Joe Biden released a pandemic strategy plan that said the country is "committed to ensuring that students and educators are able to resume safe, in-person learning as quickly as possible, with the goal of getting a majority of K-8 schools safely open in 100 days." 
 The following month, a reporter asked press secretary Jen Psaki to elaborate on Biden’s goal of reopening schools. 
 "His goal that he set is to have the majority of schools — so, more than 50% — open by day 100 of his presidency," she said Feb. 9. "And that means some teaching in classrooms. So, at least one day a week. Hopefully, it’s more. And obviously it is as much as is safe in each school and local district." 
 A week later, at a CNN town hall, Biden said "the goal will be five days a week," and he thought that for grades K-8, the country would "be close" to seeing a majority of schools fully reopened. High schools, with the greater chances of viral spread, might be more challenging, Biden said.
 Our ruling
 Rubio said that "Democrats voted to send reopening money to schools that refuse to reopen."
 Democrats voted down a Rubio amendment that would have tied the school aid amounts to whether school buildings were open to students.
 But education experts said it is not accurate to define closed or partly closed school buildings as ones that "refuse to reopen." Some schools that brought some students back backtracked in response to surging infections in the community. 
 Also, Rubio described the Democratic vote as being narrowly about reopening. They voted for money to help more schools reopen, to make changes to stay open and to provide remedial instruction to make up for lost ground.
 Rubio’s claim is partly accurate, but leaves out important context. We rate it Half True.
The strategy to achieve herd immunity within a population to reverse the spread of COVID-19 has been a matter of intense debate over the course of the pandemic. 
 One component of this debate involves the herd immunity threshold, or the percentage of a population that must be immunized from a disease, be it through infections or vaccinations, for the spread to abate. The more infectious a contagion, the higher its threshold. 
 For instance, measles, a highly infectious disease that is at least three times as contagious as COVID-19, requires a herd immunity threshold level of around 94%, meaning that 94% of a population will need to be immune to measles before its transmission rate declines. 
 But pinning down a concrete herd immunity threshold level for COVID-19 has so far been theoretical guesswork. Researchers at Johns Hopkins University say that the herd immunity threshold for any virus lies between 50% and 90%. Researchers in the United Kingdom and Brazil hypothesized during the early part of the pandemic that threshold could be as low as 6% to 21%, although their study has since been found to have critical errors. 
 Earlier this month, state Rep. Jon Rosenthal, D-Cypress, who has lost a family member and friend to COVID-19, took to Twitter to dispel common myths and "rampant misinformation" about the virus and its vaccines, which are now slowly being distributed throughout Texas. In his tweet thread, Rosenthal echoed a number that has commonly been repeated as COVID-19's herd immunity threshold. 
 "To defeat this pandemic AND recover our economy, the safest and most effective way is for the population to be immunized," he tweeted Tuesday. "The way to reach ‘herd immunity’ is for >70% of the population to get vaccinated." 
 Immunity can be reached one of two ways: through natural infections, which create antibodies in people who have recovered from a disease that can potentially ward off future infection (an estimated 20% of the global population has been infected naturally); or through vaccination, a safer way to immunity because it does not cause illness. 
 The herd immunity threshold for COVID-19 has been somewhat of a moving target throughout the pandemic as researchers grapple with understanding the virus. Let’s review what current thinking is on the virus’ threshold. 
 Determining the herd immunity threshold 
 There are two ways health experts think about a virus’ infection rate, mathematically represented as the R value. First, there’s the more theoretical R value known as the basic reproduction number, or R0 (pronounced "R naught"). This term indicates the average number of times one infected person will transmit the virus to another person. For example, measles has an R0 value between 12 and 18, meaning that one person infected with measles will, on average, spread the virus to another 12 to 18 people before they either die or recover. R0 is a theoretical figure that assumes everyone in a population is without immunity and susceptible to infection. 
 Then there is the more practical version of the R value — the effective reproduction rate, represented as Rt. The effective reproduction rate considers the fact that some people within a population will be immune to a disease, or that certain interventions have been put in place to slow spread, like social distancing or mask-wearing. The Rt value is more of a real-time representation of what a virus’ infection rate is and it decreases as a greater share of the population is immunized or as more interventions are put in place. 
 The exact R value for COVID-19, however, has not been concretely determined. According to Spencer Fox, associate director of the COVID-19 modeling consortium at the University of Texas, data during the early period of the pandemic suggested that the R0 rate was 2.5. Now it is believed to be within the 4 to 6 range. The Rt value, while much harder to determine, is estimated to be around 1.05 in the U.S. thanks to preventative measures and natural immunities. 
 "There's kind of been this shifting conversation about what is the actual basic reproduction number of the virus," Fox said. "We try and extrapolate from other populations, but every population will have a slightly different number." 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Typically, it is the R0 figure that is used in determining a virus’ herd immunity threshold because the goal is to return to a state of normalcy where interventions are no longer necessary. The threshold is calculated by plugging the R0 value into a formula: [1-(1÷R0)]*100 = threshold %. 
 With an R0 value of 2.5, the herd immunity threshold for COVID-19 would be 60%. With an R0 value of 6, the threshold would be 83%. 
 But according to Dr. David Dowdy, associate professor at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, these numbers are highly theoretical. 
 The herd immunity threshold is "something that’s easy for the public to understand, but not really reflective of reality," Dowdy said. "The reality is that it’s a spectrum, but people like to see things in black and white and they like to have specific numbers to latch onto." 
 "At some point we will build up enough immunity. Whether it be through people getting the disease or through people getting the vaccine, that transmission (rate) will start to go down," he said. "It's not like there's a magic number that we have to hit and if we don't hit it we'll forever have this pandemic with us. The more people we can get vaccinated the fewer people get sick and die." 
 According to Fox, publicizing a herd immunity threshold level, while not accurately reflective of reality, does have usefulness. 
 "Right now, the main use of providing a high number is to motivate people to actually get the vaccine, because in my mind we should try and vaccinate as many people as possible," Fox said. 
 The 70% threshold cited by Rosenthal and others is, to Fox, "in the ballpark." 
 "It could be possibly as low as 50% and as high as 80%, so 70% is kind of in the middle. I would shoot higher. I wouldn't have this expectation that the disease goes away at this point," he said. 
 Our ruling 
 On Jan. 5, Rosenthal published a tweet saying that the way to reach herd immunity is for at least 70% of the population to get vaccinated. In an email, Rosenthal said his information came from a Reuters article that cited the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control estimating a 67% herd immunity threshold and the World Health Organization estimating a 65% to 70% threshold. 
 "There are apparently too many unknowns to be certain, but the 70% figure lines up with some common estimates," Rosenthal said. 
 The herd immunity threshold is calculated by using a disease’s rate of transmission. Although scientists have not agreed upon a definite rate, and even though these rates are highly theoretical, estimates show that the thresholds lies somewhere between 60% and 83%. 
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
Some Facebook users think President Donald Trump’s recent interest in a lupus and arthritis drug goes beyond its potential to treat COVID-19.
 "Trump himself has a financial stake in the French company that makes the brand-name version of hydroxychloroquine," reads one post published April 7.
 The image, which is a screenshot of a tweet from Ian Sams, the former national press secretary for Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif., was shared in a group for "center left pragmatic progressives" called The 47ers. It was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 
 
 In the past few weeks, Trump has touted the potential of chloroquine and the related drug hydroxychloroquine in treating COVID-19. There is some preliminary evidence that the drugs could be effective in treating the coronavirus, but more rigorous tests have not been completed. There is currently no Food and Drug Administration-approved treatment for COVID-19.
 We’ve previously reported on alleged financial ties between the Trump administration and hydroxychloroquine manufacturers, so we wanted to look into this claim, too.
 Trump does have a small financial stake in a French company that makes hydroxychloroquine. But the implication of the post, that Trump could stand to profit from that stake, is misleading. 
 The New York Times reported on April 6 that the president has a personal financial interest in Sanofi, a French company that makes hydroxychloroquine, through a mutual fund from a firm called Dodge & Cox. At 3.3%, Sanofi is the largest holding of the firm’s International Stock Fund.
 But Trump’s stake in that fund is rather small.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The president’s latest financial disclosure form indicates that he holds shares in the mutual fund through three different family trusts. The value of each of those holdings is between $1,001 and $15,000, which would put Trump’s stake in Sanofi at "between about $100 and $1,500 in total," the Washington Post reported.
 "That Sanofi investment would therefore constitute between 0.000003 and 0.00005 percent of Trump’s net worth," the newspaper wrote. "If you were worth $100,000, it would be like worrying about the nickel in your pocket."
 RELATED: Hydroxychloroquine and coronavirus: what you need to know
 Let’s pretend that Trump’s last financial disclosure form is up-to-date and that his total holdings in Sanofi are valued at $1,500 — the high end of the range.
 Since March 20, the day after the president first mentioned chloroquine during a press briefing, the company’s stock value has increased by about 17.3%. That would mean the value of Trump’s shares in Sanofi has increased by nearly $260.
 Given the president’s net worth, which Bloomberg estimates to be nearly $3 billion, $260 would be a comparatively small payoff for promoting the use of hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19. Plus, it’s uncertain whether Trump’s remarks have affected Sanofi’s stock value; the company has performed about as well as the broader stock market.
 Legally, experts say Trump’s holdings in Sanofi don’t constitute a conflict of interest.
 Kathleen Clark, a law professor at Washington University, said in an email that federal law prohibits executive branch officials from participating in matters in which they have a financial interest. But the law exempts diversified mutual funds like the Dodge & Cox International Stock Fund — and because he’s the president, Trump isn’t subject to the regulation anyway.
 "When Congress amended the ethics laws in 1989, it exempted the president from the criminal financial conflict of interest statute. So the statute doesn’t apply to Trump at all," Clark said. "And even if this statute did apply to the president, the regulation’s exemption would seem to apply here. So Trump’s touting of this drug does not violate the criminal conflict of interest statute."
 Trump has a tiny stake in Sanofi through a mutual fund, but experts told us that Trump’s holdings do not violate federal conflict of interest laws. The post leaves out important context, so we rate it Half True.
Native American tribes have been among the hardest hit by the coronavirus pandemic, and Joe Biden claims that President Donald Trump has not done enough to help.
 "Donald Trump has failed to live up to our trust and treaty obligations to Native Americans," Biden told The Arizona Republic May 21. "He took more than a month to allocate Congress’ emergency funding to tribes — and only did so after tribes sued. He has failed to provide tribes with adequate protective personal equipment and medical supplies. It’s unacceptable."
 Indian treaty rights recognized and established rights, benefits, and conditions for tribes who agreed to cede millions of acres of land to the United States and to accept the United States’ protection. Under a "trust responsibility" legal principle, the United States federal government is obligated to ensure the survival and welfare of Indian tribes.
 Is Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, right that it took more than a month for tribes to get funding allocated by Congress, and that it happened only after suing the Trump administration? The chronology lines up, but omits important context.
 The Treasury Department has argued that payments were delayed because it is required to consult with tribes and the Interior Department regarding how much money to allocate to tribes. That consultation process started before the lawsuit over the delay in payments. A separate lawsuit filed by tribes to prevent corporations in Alaska from receiving aid has also affected the process.
 CARES Act allocated $8 billion for tribal governments
 Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, and Trump signed it into law March 27. The $2.2 trillion measure included a $150 billion Coronavirus Relief Fund for states, local governments, and tribal governments.
 The law set aside $8 billion for tribal governments. The law said the Treasury secretary had to make the payments within 30 days; so by April 26, all entities were supposed to have received funds. It wasn’t until May 5 that the Treasury Department said it would begin making funds available to tribal governments. So that part of Biden’s claim adds up.
 Lawsuits over corporations’ eligibility, payment delays
 By May 5, the Trump administration was facing several lawsuits by multiple tribes: for delay of payment. The lawsuits also challenged the administration for intending to direct some of the funds to the Alaska Native Corporations, which are regional and village corporations recognized under Alaska law and created by Congress as part of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971.
 In the lawsuit to stop the corporations from getting a share of the $8 billion, tribes argued that corporations do not meet the statutory definition of "tribal government," or "Indian tribe" and therefore did not qualify for the relief. A federal district judge on April 27 issued a preliminary injunction to prevent the Treasury from giving money to the corporations. Pending a final determination, the judge did not direct the Treasury secretary to immediately disburse the entire $8 billion to the tribes.
 In its May 5 announcement, the Trump administration said it would begin paying tribes 60% of the $8 billion, or $4.8 billion, based on population data. The remaining 40% would be paid at "a later date" based on employment data and tribe expenses related to COVID-19. Amounts calculated for corporations would be held back "until pending litigation relating to their eligibility is resolved."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Navajo Nation, which joined tribes in the lawsuit, on May 5 said the judge’s April 27 ruling "led to the (Treasury) Department’s announcement to begin distributing funds to federally-recognized tribes."
 In a separate lawsuit over the delay in the disbursement of funds, lawyers for the Trump administration argued that providing funds to tribal governments required a more involved and difficult process than the one for states and local governments.
 While the CARES Act imposed a 30-day deadline for funds disbursement, it also called for a consultation process among tribes and the Treasury and Interior departments. According to the Trump administration, Treasury staff spent about 2,200 hours on efforts to get tribes the appropriated money.
 The same federal district judge from the corporations case said that those hours of labor "arguably should have produced better results," but a court intervention was not warranted.
 "‘Egregious’ delay is the governing standard, and the Secretary is not there quite yet, even in the midst of a public health crisis," U.S. District Court Judge Amit P. Mehta wrote in a May 11 opinion.
 Mehta did not find that the Treasury secretary was "lagging unreasonably" behind in delivering the funds. "The Secretary has not been ‘twiddling his thumbs’," he said, citing language from a precedent.
 Mehta said he would not give the Treasury department a deadline for disbursing the rest of the funds, but if it took the department double the amount of time Congress directed for the disbursement, "then the question of egregiousness becomes a closer one than it is today."
 Our ruling
 Biden said Trump "took more than a month to allocate Congress’ emergency funding to tribes — and only did so after tribes sued."
 It did take more than a month for tribes to begin receiving funds appropriated by Congress, and they began to flow after lawsuits were filed against the Trump administration. But a consultation process for disbursing the funds began before the administration was sued.
 We rate Biden’s statement Mostly True.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi questioned whether it made sense for the Trump administration to stop travel from certain countries in Europe — but not the United Kingdom — in order to stop the spread of the coronavirus.
 At Pelosi’s weekly press conference, a reporter asked if she thought the administration’s travel ban was "wise." Pelosi said she had spoken with Vice President Mike Pence and Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, and was told it was a "scientific medical decision."
 "I have great confidence in Dr. Fauci. It's just strange, because they're saying it's because it's easy to travel among these countries. But they're separate from the U.K.," Pelosi said. "Well, you can just get in the Chunnel, and you'll be in the U.K. Again, it's a decision they made. It has its ramifications. We'll see whether it's worth the trouble."
 Pelosi said she wasn’t there to criticize President Donald Trump’s decisions, but emphasized that testing would be "the only way" to learn how the virus is spreading.
 PolitiFact wanted to take a closer look at Pelosi’s comments about travel in Europe and how it relates to the details in Trump’s proclamation.
 Trump’s travel ban
 Trump’s proclamation seeks to restrict "all aliens who were physically present within the Schengen Area during the 14-day period preceding their entry or attempted entry into the United States."
 U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents and their close relatives are exempt from the ban. So are numerous categories of other people.
 The Schengen Area covers European states that agree to free movement among their nations without border checks. Countries in the zone include Austria, Belgium, and France (here’s the full list). The United Kingdom — England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland — is not part of the Schengen Area. (Neither is the Republic of Ireland, a member of the European Union that borders Northern Ireland.)
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 10, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Italy drastically reduced the country’s official COV1D-19 death count by over 97%. This means Covid killed fewer people than an average seasonal flu.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When Pelosi said "well, you can just get in the Chunnel, and you'll be in the U.K,," she was referring to the Channel Tunnel (Chunnel is the short name) that runs under the English Channel linking England and France. People move from one country to the other via trains.
 However, even if someone gets from France to the United Kingdom, they can’t get on a plane right away and come to the United States, since Trump’s proclamation bars people who had been in Schengen Area two weeks before.
 People from the United Kingdom who traveled to a Schengen Area state in the two weeks before their attempted travel to the United States would presumably be barred entry, unless they qualify for the exemptions.
 Pelosi didn’t say that a person could cross the Chunnel and then immediately travel from the United Kingdom to the United States, said Henry V. Connelly, Pelosi’s deputy communications director.
 "The point is that, with the ease of travel between the U.K. and the continent, there’s not a meaningful difference in risk of the community spread of coronavirus between the two — and thus, not much difference in the coronavirus risk from a person from the U.K. or from inside Schengen Area," Connelly said.
 Our ruling
 Speaking of Trump’s Europe travel restriction exempting the United Kingdom, Pelosi said, "Well you can just get into the Chunnel, and you’ll be in the U.K."
 It isn't that easy to get around the restrictions by taking a train linking England and France. The travel ban applies to people who were in the Schengen Area 14 days before their attempted travel to the United States. So someone in France who traveled to England would not be immediately exempt from the restrictions. 
 Pelosi’s statement is partially accurate but leaves out important details or takes things out of context. We rate it Half True.
 RELATED: Fact-checking Donald Trump’s mistakes about European travel due to coronavirus
 
 
 
 
 
 Update March 15, 2020, 4:33 p.m. eastern time: After we published this report, Trump in a March 14 proclamation announced similar entry restrictions for people who were in the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland 14 days prior to their attempted entry into the United States. That ban’s effective date is 11:59 p.m. eastern daylight time on March 16, 2020.
As truck drivers across the country provide an essential service, delivering food and supplies during the COVID-19 pandemic, complaints have surfaced about some fast-food chains turning them away. 
 In response to the epidemic, many restaurants are offering only drive-thru service. But Facebook posts, like these, chronicle story after story of truckers attempting to get meals at popular fast-food restaurants only to be turned away when they attempt to walk up and order at these drive-thru windows:
 "***Glenshaw***This McDonalds is Refusing to serve truckers, because they can’t drive through the drive-thru. The manager was disrespectful. They are out supplying (sic) are stores with food for all of us. They are out all night and can’t eat or get a coffee?"
 The posts were flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.) But in this case, there's more truth to the claim than not.
 Fast-food restaurants including McDonald’s, Wendy’s, KFC and Taco Bell recently announced they were shutting down dining rooms amid the coronavirus outbreak and switching to a to-go model, emphasizing delivery and drive-thru orders. 
 Social media posts say truckers can’t maneuver their rigs through drive-thru lanes, so their only option is to walk up to the windows.
 Trucking news website Transportation Nation reported that one trucking group reached out to McDonald’s on March 18 asking for changes to be made to allow truckers easier access to food.
 "Truckers are having a difficult time finding food on the road due to various closures because of the national emergency," wrote James Lamb, president of the 15,000-member Small Business in Transportation Coalition. "We are told they are being refused service when they walk up to your drive thru windows because they are not in sedans and their 80,000 lb. big rig trucks do not fit through your drive thru driveways."
 Lamb asked the company to make temporary accommodations for trucker customers.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Viral image
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A banner for COVID-19 vaccines says, “Don’t forget to donate your childrens organs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Ciara O'Rourke • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 McDonald’s responded by creating a curbside ordering system. The fast-food chain pointed PolitiFact to a March 23 statement that addresses the issue:
 "As the world continues to address the quickly changing landscape, we are in this together with you, our valued friends in the trucking and transportation industry. Thank you for everything you are doing to keep essential parts of our economy going.
 "However, at some locations, only Drive-Thru and McDelivery are available. We realize that you can’t bring your rig through the Drive-Thru and for safety reasons, we cannot accept walk up orders at the Drive-Thru window."
 McDonald’s instructed truckers to use its mobile order and pay app and then walk to "the designated Trucker curbside sign on the sidewalk outside our designated door." An employee will bring the order out when it’s ready.
 But it’s not just McDonald’s. Reports of similar incidents at Wendy’s and Burger King have also surfaced. We reached out to both, but only heard back from Wendy’s. A spokesperson sent a statement saying Wendy’s is "particularly appreciative of the nation’s truck drivers who are a vital part of our supply chain."
 It continued: "We are continuing to explore options to continue to make Wendy’s food available to as many of our loyal customers as possible during this difficult time, but of course we must continue to focus on safety and security at our restaurants as a top priority."
 Our ruling
 Social media posts claim truck drivers are being turned away from fast-food restaurants with shuttered dining rooms since they can’t fit their rigs in drive-thru lanes.
 This is really happening. It’s worth noting that McDonald’s has responded with a curbside ordering app at some locations to help accommodate truckers. And Wendy’s says they are exploring options. 
 These reports are accurate but need additional, updated information. We rate them Mostly True.
Just days after Democrats suffered a setback by losing the Virginia gubernatorial race, White House Chief of Staff Ron Klain appeared on NBC’s "Meet the Press" to paint a more optimistic picture for President Joe Biden and his party.
 On the Nov. 7 show, Klain favorably compared the administration’s stewardship of the economy and the coronavirus pandemic with that of his predecessor, Donald Trump.
 The Biden administration, Klain said, inherited gains of "50,000 jobs a month. We're now finally back to 500,000 jobs a month. We inherited a country where 4,000 people a day were dying from COVID. That's now down 75%."
 These two metrics have improved under Biden, but Klain exaggerated the numbers on the difference between the records of the two presidents.
 Job growth figures
 First, we looked at the monthly change in nonfarm employment during the five months prior to the first full jobs report on Biden’s watch. Those were September, October November, and December 2020, and January 2021. (Trump and Biden effectively shared responsibility for the January 2021 figures.)
 During one of those months — December 2020 — employment shrank, by 306,000 jobs. In the other four, employment increased, and by a lot more than 50,000. It rose by 716,000 in September 2020, 680,000 in October 2020, 264,000 in November 2020, and 233,000 in January 2021.
 All told, the average gain during those five months, even including the big drop in December, was a bit over 321,000 per month, or more than six times what Klain said.
 After Biden took office, the job gains did increase. From February 2021 to October 2021, the average monthly gain was 620,000, or almost twice the rate during Trump’s last five months.
 
 
 The White House did not respond to an inquiry for this article, but we suspect Klain’s comparison was based on initial job figures for January 2021 that were reported on Feb. 5. The initial figures suggested that jobs increased by only 49,000.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 However, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the agency that tabulates the official employment data, revises the data in later months, so the final figures usually differ from the initial release.
 In this case, the BLS revised the January 2021 figure upwards from 49,000 to 233,000, or almost five times larger than the initial figure that Klain appeared to be citing. (The October 2021 gain of 531,000 that Klain touted will also be revised either downward or upward over the next few months.)
 Even if we use the initial January 2021 figure of 49,000, that would ignore some significantly stronger figures during the fall of 2020. The initial, unrevised employment gains released by the BLS were 661,100 in September; 638,000 in October; and 245,000 for November.
 Coronavirus death statistics
 Klain exaggerated the degree of improvement on COVID-19 as well.
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data compiled by the Washington Post shows that the seven-day rolling average for daily coronavirus deaths on Jan. 20 — when Biden was sworn in — was 3,065.
 On Nov. 7, the day Klain appeared on "Meet the Press," the equivalent figure was 1,185. That’s a decrease of 61%, or less than the 75% decline that Klain cited.
 Here, too, we think we know where Klain was getting his number. On Jan. 20, there were 4,400 coronavirus deaths. However, there are variations in when coronavirus deaths are reported, with the figures typically dropping on weekends when many public health offices are closed. So researchers recommend using a seven-day rolling average, which counts the previous seven days in order to smooth out the variations in data reporting.
 For this reason, it’s not unusual for a weekday — like Jan. 20, which was a Wednesday — to have a higher death total than the seven-day rolling average. In fact, the seven-day rolling average has never exceeded about 3,300 deaths per day during the entire pandemic.
 Our ruling
 Klain said the Biden administration inherited gains of "50,000 jobs a month. We're now finally back to 500,000 jobs a month. We inherited a country where 4,000 people a day were dying from COVID. That's now down 75%."
 The Biden administration can trumpet gains in both areas, but they are not as dramatic as Klain said. 
 The job gains under Biden are almost twice as big as they were late in the Trump administration, not 10 times bigger. And the rate of coronavirus deaths has fallen by 61%, not 75%, on Biden’s watch.
 We rate the statement Half True.
MORGANTOWN, W.Va. — Did the U.S. military take over the site where a truck carrying coronavirus vaccines crashed in Morgantown, W.Va.? That’s what a recent viral social media post said.
 The viral tweet, also shared across other social media platforms, said that "near Morgantown, WV, a Moderna shipment truck crashed, hazmat dispatched, airspace shut down and now apparently Emergency Response is claiming the Department of Defense took it over."
 Something bad just went down near Morgantown, WV
 
 A Moderna shipment truck crashed, hazmat dispatched, airspace shut down and now apparently Emergency Response is claiming the Department of Defense took it over https://t.co/gNQeWXkmAN— Tim Pool (@Timcast) August 30, 2021 
 Moderna is a company that produces one of the main vaccines being used in the United States to combat the coronavirus.
 So what happened just past midnight on Aug. 27 on a stretch of Interstate 79 in West Virginia? 
 
 (AP)
 We checked with the agencies that were on the scene, as well as federal officials responsible for overseeing shipments. We found that there was indeed a crash involving a shipment of Moderna vaccines, but that the accident response was handled by local officials.
 In a press release, the Monongalia County Sheriff’s Office confirmed that a tractor-trailer carrying Moderna vaccines crashed along Interstate 79. A local hazmat squad was dispatched to the scene to clean up 50 gallons of antifreeze and oil that had leaked from the vehicle, the press release said. 
 "A truck carrying 1.2 million doses of Moderna vaccine destined for Ghana had an accident on the way to Dulles airport" outside Washington, D.C., the federal Department of Health and Human Services said in a statement to PolitiFact. "We understand the driver was taken to hospital but has since been discharged."
 HHS added that COVAX, an international consortium to share vaccines to nations across the world, and its partner agencies "are working closely with the U.S. government to ensure disruptions to shipments of life-saving vaccines are as minimal as possible."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook posts
 
 
 stated on November 7, 2021 in a Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Astroworld concert was a “test run on the vaxxed” because people who are injected with graphene oxide can be controlled through magnetic frequencies, including music.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Samantha Putterman • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It was not immediately clear whether the vaccines in the shipment were saved or lost.
 So what about the airspace being shut down?
 One local news outlet reported that a member of the hazardous-material team responding to the crash told them the airspace had been shut down. However, we could not confirm that. Monongalia County Emergency Management Director Jim Smith told PolitiFact that the airspace was never shut down. 
 What about the Defense Department taking over the clean up process? 
 The Pentagon does have a hand in distributing federal coronavirus vaccines, through the Countermeasures Acceleration Group, a collaboration between the Pentagon, HHS and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
 However, the Defense Department was never a part of the cleanup operation and was never on the scene of the crash, Smith said.
 Our ruling
 Social media posts said that "near Morgantown, WV, a Moderna shipment truck crashed, hazmat dispatched, airspace shut down and now apparently Emergency Response is claiming the Department of Defense took it over."
 A truck carrying Moderna vaccines did crash near Morgantown, and a local hazmat crew was called to clean up debris. 
 However, local emergency management agencies said that the airspace was not shut down and that the Defense Department never dispatched officials to the site of the crash. It was handled exclusively by local agencies, officials said.
 We rate the statement Half True.
Roy Cooper and Dan Forest agree that North Carolina’s coronavirus response stands out among southern states.
 But the gubernatorial candidates disagree over whether that’s a good thing.
 Democratic Gov. Cooper and Republican Lt. Gov. Forest squared off on Wednesday night for North Carolina’s only gubernatorial debate of the year. At one point in the debate, Forest praised North Carolina’s border states for allowing many businesses to reopen while their respective governments addressed the coronavirus outbreak.
 "This COVID science is an interesting thing because you cross the border into South Carolina and South Carolina’s open and people are out there going to restaurants and doing things," Forest said. "You cross into Tennessee and Tennessee is open, you cross into Georgia and Georgia is open. They’re learning how to live with the virus and protect the vulnerable and get people back to work."
 Cooper immediately offered a comparison between North Carolina and Georgia.
 "It’s interesting that Dan mentions Georgia … He wants to be like Georgia," Cooper said. "Georgia is about the same size as North Carolina, yet they have almost 100,000 more cases, almost twice as many deaths and almost 600 more nursing home deaths than North Carolina."
 Cooper is right about the sizes of North Carolina and Georgia. Georgia is the eighth most populous state in the U.S. and North Carolina is the ninth most populous, according to 2019 census data. The states are separated by fewer than 130,000 people.
 So what about those stats Cooper mentioned?
 Cooper spokeswoman Liz Doherty referred us to a coronavirus tracker on the New York Times website and nursing home data on the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services website. PolitiFact North Carolina also looked at information on the North Carolina and Georgia state websites.
 Case counts vary a little bit, depending on the source. But otherwise, Cooper is mostly spot-on.
 Comparing cases
 Cooper said Georgia has almost 100,000 more cases than North Carolina. On the night of the debate, data from each state’s health department showed Georgia with about 98,100 more cases. So Cooper’s not far off. 
 North Carolina’s health department reported 236,407 confirmed cases and Georgia’s health department reported 334,601 cases. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The New York Times map showed 236,810 cases for North Carolina and 319,609 total cases for Georgia, for a difference of about 82,800.
 Cooper didn’t compare each state’s infection numbers to its population. But that statistic provides useful context.
 The night of the debate, the New York Times’ reported that North Carolina had 2,258 cases per 100,000 residents and Georgia had 3,010 cases per 100,000 residents.
 Comparing deaths
 Cooper said Georgia had "almost twice as many deaths" as North Carolina. This claim is on track too.
 On the night of the debate, North Carolina’s health department reported 3,856 total deaths. Twice that many would be 7,712 deaths. Georgia’s health department reported 7,470 total deaths. 
 The Times, meanwhile, reported 3,882 total deaths in North Carolina (a rate of 37 deaths per 100,000 residents) and 7,298 total deaths in Georgia (meaning 69 deaths per 100,000 people.)
 So if you look at total deaths, the Times and the NC health department both show there have been about 3,800. Georgia is 200 to 400 deaths away from having twice as many. 
 Nursing homes
 Finally, let’s look at nursing homes.
 Cooper said Georgia has had almost 600 more nursing home deaths than North Carolina. On debate night, data tracked by the federal government showed Georgia having 569 more nursing home deaths than North Carolina.
 CMS reported 1,328 nursing home deaths in North Carolina and 1,897 in Georgia.
 Cooper didn’t mention nursing home cases. To round out the full picture, we’ll report them anyway.
 On the night of the debate, CMS reported 6,523 total nursing home cases in North Carolina and 9,483 total cases in Georgia.
 Our ruling
 Cooper said Georgia has "almost 100,000 more cases, almost twice as many deaths and almost 600 more nursing home deaths than North Carolina."
 His claim about cases requires the most rounding, but isn’t far off. But his claim about deaths — in total and in nursing homes — are spot-on. We rate this claim True.
Wisconsin’s vaccine distribution — like most everything else in Wisconsin in recent years — has sparked a partisan blame game.
 Republicans have criticized the rollout as slow and uncoordinated, asserting Democratic Gov. Tony Evers doesn’t have a sufficient plan. Evers has countered that he’s doing the best he can with the available supply, claiming Vice President Mike Pence had promised vaccines from a federal reserve that didn’t actually exist.
 Republican Rebecca Kleefisch, a potential 2022 gubernatorial candidate, said Evers is leading an effort that ranks among the worst in the region.
 "Wisconsin is second to last in the Midwest in our vaccination rate and the governor says he’s ‘satisfied,’" Kleefisch, the former lieutenant governor under Gov. Scott Walker, said in a Jan. 14, 2021, tweet.
 Does Wisconsin really rank that poorly?
 Let’s dig in.
 Wisconsin vaccine rollout among the worst
 We’ll leave for another day the question of who’s to blame for the speed of Wisconsin’s vaccine rollout.
 But the status is clear — Wisconsin is among the slowest in the nation. In fact, Kleefisch was over-stating the Midwest ranking.
 State-by-state data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed 2.4% of Wisconsin residents received their first dose of the coronavirus vaccine as of Jan. 13, the most recent data available when Kleefisch sent out her tweet.
 That ranked dead last among the 12 Midwest states. North Dakota and South Dakota led that ranking with more than 5% receiving a first dose, while Ohio and Missouri joined Wisconsin at the bottom, with 2.8% and 2.6%, respectively.
 In the preceding days, Wisconsin had ranked second-last in the Midwest.
 Nationwide as of Jan. 13, Wisconsin ranked 41st out of all 50 states in vaccination rate, well off the national average of 3.1%.
 The ranking only worsened in the ensuing week, with Wisconsin dropping to 44th by Jan. 19 while remaining last in the Midwest, according to the CDC.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pushing back against Kleefisch’s claim, Evers spokeswoman Britt Cudaback pointed to CDC data on the raw number of vaccinations administered. That showed Wisconsin ranked seventh out of the 12 Midwest states as of Jan. 13.
 But that’s not a reasonable way to compare progress when dealing with states that vary dramatically in population. It would be like arguing Texas is the highest-crime state because it has the most prison inmates. The latter may be true, but only because Texas has one of the highest populations. Comparing it to other states requires examining the number of inmates relative to the population (in which case Texas is not first).
 That’s where the per capita rate comes in — which is the vaccination metric used by the CDC and referenced by Kleefisch.
 Cudaback also said Wisconsin’s ability to administer vaccines is limited by its large long-term care population. Vaccines are made available to states based on population, but states are required to store enough doses for everyone in long-term care before any doses can be administered to other groups. State officials say Wisconsin has a higher proportion of long-term care residents than many states and therefore has to build a larger bank before administering vaccines, slowing the process.
 Yes, Evers called the progress ‘satisfactory’
 That brings us to the second part of Kleefisch’s claim, that Evers is comfortable with where the state stands.
 She’s off a bit there, at least in how she framed it.
 In a Jan. 13 interview with WISN-TV, Evers was asked, "Is this acceptable to you where we’re at" as a state on vaccinations.
 "Given what we have, we can’t give any more. That’s the issue," the governor said. "Yes, I'm satisfied where we're at because that's all we had."
 So Evers isn’t necessarily saying he’s satisfied with being second-last (or last). He’s saying he is satisfied with the progress given what he has had to work with.
 Whether that’s a valid excuse is a topic for another fact check, as there are of course vaccines on hand in Wisconsin that haven’t yet been administered. But he’s not quite using the word in the same way Kleefisch characterized it.
 Cudaback also said Wisconsin’s ability to administer vaccines is limited by its large long-term care population. Vaccines are made available to states based on population, but states are required to store enough doses for everyone in long-term care before any doses can be administered to other groups. State officials say Wisconsin has a higher proportion of long-term care residents than many states and therefore has to build a larger bank before administering vaccines, slowing the process.
 Our ruling
 Criticizing the rollout under Evers’ administration, Kleefisch said Wisconsin is second to last in the Midwest in vaccination rate.
 Kleefisch is making the general point that Wisconsin is in worse shape than surrounding states, and that’s correct. But it’s in fact even worse than she asserted. After a stretch as second-worst in the Midwest, Wisconsin moved to last on that list shortly before Kleefisch’s tweet.
 And Evers did say around the same time he was satisfied with the state’s progress, though he used the term with a caveat about vaccine availability.
 We rate this claim Mostly True.
New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, whose daily press briefings on the state’s battle against the coronavirus have drawn wide coverage, has extended his rhetorical reach through social media.
 On April 12, Cuomo took to Twitter to spotlight what he saw as a disparity in federal funding between New York and states that had fewer coronavirus cases.
 "Some states, like Montana and Nebraska, are getting more than $300,000 in federal stimulus money per reported COVID-19 case. New York is the hardest-hit state and yet we are getting only about $12,000 per case," Cuomo tweeted. 
 Some states, like Montana and Nebraska, are getting more than $300,000 in federal stimulus money per reported COVID-19 case.
 
 New York is the hardest-hit state and yet we are getting only about $12,000 per case.
 
 We need a fair federal stimulus bill that is distributed by need.— Andrew Cuomo (@NYGovCuomo) April 12, 2020 
 
 We found that the statement relies on a credible study of how one part of the federal funding is being divided among the states, though it glosses over the fact that it’s counting money going to health care providers directly, rather than to the states themselves.
 Comparing the number of cases
 The number of coronavirus cases changes by day, and even by the hour. But at the time he made his claim, Cuomo was correct to say the difference between New York and the other two states was lopsided.
 New York has been hardest hit by the coronavirus. On April 12, the state reported a cumulative 195,031 known cases of the virus. 
 Montana and Nebraska, which have far smaller populations, saw much smaller outbreaks of the virus at the time: Montana had 394 reported cases, while Nebraska reported 792. 
 Comparing the federal funding
 The money Cuomo is referencing comes from the $2.2 trillion federal coronavirus aid package passed in March, known as the CARES Act. 
 While that bill earmarked $150 billion directly for state, local and tribal governments, the breakdown Cuomo is referring to comes from a different provision that provides funds directly to hospitals and other health care providers. 
 This portion of the CARES Act allocates up to $100 billion to health care providers. When Cuomo sent his tweet, $30 billion of that total had been distributed.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, providers have received money from the stimulus bill based on a formula that involves how much money they received from Medicare reimbursements in 2019 (excluding payments under Medicare Advantage, which works through private insurers). 
 HHS estimated that these Medicare reimbursements amounted to $484 billion in 2019. Because HHS wanted to push the first $30 billion of coronavirus aid out the door quickly, it allocated the money based on providers’ share of these reimbursements from 2019. 
 In other words, the formula for this first stage of funding had nothing to do with the number of coronavirus cases a state was facing.
 Using these guidelines, Kaiser Health News, a PolitiFact fact-checking partner, calculated how much money providers in each state had received from the $30 billion. The publication based these numbers on a House Ways and Means Committee funds breakdown and New York Times daily coronavirus numbers. 
 The analysis was originally published two days before Cuomo’s tweet. 
 According to Kaiser Health News’ published analysis, hospitals and providers in New York state were due to receive stimulus money amounting to $12,000 per coronavirus case at the time. 
 Providers in states with fewer cases, such as Montana and Nebraska, had received over $300,000 per case, according to the analysis. 
 So Cuomo’s tweet tracks what the Kaiser Health News analysis found, though it’s worth noting that the total amount given to New York providers in this initial round, nearly $1.9 billion, was significantly more than what went to the other states: about $111 million for Montana and $225 million for Nebraska, according to the authors of the analysis.
 Jack Hoadley, an emeritus professor at Georgetown University’s Health Policy Institute, told PolitiFact New York that the Kaiser study’s methodology was sound. He added that later rounds should address this imbalance. HHS has said that the next wave of the $100 billion will take into account how many coronavirus cases each state has.
 This "should respond at least in part to the concern raised by Gov. Cuomo," he said, though "more information is needed before we can assess the dollars-per-patient metric" down the road.
 Freeman Klopott, a spokesman for the New York State Division of the Budget, told PolitiFact that "the tweet relied on information from a Kaiser Health News article and quoted it nearly word for word. There’s no question that the facts are accurate and there is a disparity in the federal funding structure among states in this regard."
 Our ruling
 Cuomo tweeted, "Some states, like Montana and Nebraska, are getting more than $300,000 in federal stimulus money per reported COVID-19 case. New York is the hardest-hit state and yet we are getting only about $12,000 per case,"
 In the first round of funding for health care providers, New York state’s providers received far less money per coronavirus case than other, less-affected states, according to a credible analysis. However, Cuomo’s tweet addressed only one part of the federal funding, and it glossed over the distinction between states and health care providers in those states. The funding source Cuomo tweeted about sends money to providers, not the state.
 The statement is accurate but needs additional information, so we rate it Mostly True.
President Joe Biden made a forceful pitch to Republicans in Congress to "listen to their constituents" and pass his $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan to help Americans recover from the pandemic.
 "According to the polls, there is overwhelming bipartisan support," Biden said Feb. 19 at a Pfizer plant in Michigan that produces vaccines. "The vast majority of the American people — more than 70% of the American people, with all the polls you all conduct, including a majority of Republicans — want us to act, and act big and quickly and support the plan."
 The House is expected to vote on the American Rescue Plan before the end of February, while the Senate is expected to take it up by mid-March. The legislation includes a $1,400 cash payment, aid to help K-12 schools open and money for vaccinations and unemployment assistance. Republican lawmakers have criticized Biden’s plan, with some GOP senators proposing a smaller package.
 Polls in late January and February found that most Americans do support Biden’s $1.9 trillion plan. But when we fact-checked his claim that a majority of Republicans support it, we found those who identify as Republican were generally less favorable to the aid package, even if they supported some elements of it.
 What the polls show about the American Rescue Plan
 The White House cited one poll to back up Biden’s statement about Republican support. A CBS poll conducted by YouGov asked respondents: "Would you approve or disapprove of Congress passing an additional economic relief package that would provide funds to people and businesses impacted by the coronavirus outbreak?" In response, 70% of Republicans said they approved, while 95% of Democrats approved.
 The question did not include the $1.9 trillion price tag, or mention Biden’s name. A subsequent question asked respondents if they think the economic relief package is "too much," "not enough" or "about the right amount." Among Republicans, 38% said the package is too much, while 27% said not enough and 34% said about the right amount.
 Two other polls showed less support among Republicans. In those polls, the questions mentioned the $1.9 trillion cost and Biden’s name.
 Quinnipiac asked adults: "You may know, the Biden administration has proposed a $1.9 trillion stimulus relief bill in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Do you support or oppose this bill?" The poll showed 68% support his $1.9 trillion plan overall, but 47% of Republicans said they were opposed, with 16% offering no opinion. In a subsequent question, a majority of Republicans indicated they support a $1,400 stimulus payment.
 SurveyMonkey/New York Times asked respondents "Do you approve or disapprove of President Biden’s proposed $1.9 trillion stimulus package, which would provide federal support to individuals and businesses impacted by the coronavirus?" The poll found that 72% overall approved, but among Republicans, 56% disapproved.
 Asked about certain components of the package, the majority of Republicans identified the $1,400 checks, COVID-19 vaccine distribution and money for state and local governments and schools as important elements.
 The wording of poll questions matters
 Polls can find different answers to questions on the same topic depending upon the precise wording of the question and whether they include partisan cues.
 John G. Geer, a political science professor at Vanderbilt University, pointed to the wording in the CBS/YouGov poll, which asked about "economic relief" and not "stimulus."
 "Republicans may favor ‘economic relief’ more than ‘stimulus relief,’" or package, said Geer, who co-directs the Vanderbilt Poll. "Stimulus is governmental activism, which GOPers tend not to support."
 Another likely factor is that the CBS question asked about Congress, while the other polls mentioned Biden. "Mentioning Biden activates partisanship," Geer said. "Even though Congress is controlled by the (Democrats), the wording is not as likely to activate that."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Barry C. Burden, director of the Elections Research Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, said surveys conducted over the years have shown that mentioning the president’s name in a question creates more resistance from members of the opposite party.
 "Compared with other surveys, the CBS/YouGov poll finds more support among Republicans for two reasons: It does not mention the price tag and it does not mention President Biden," Burden said.
 Karlyn Bowman, a polling expert at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, said including the cost of the bill in the question probably gave many Republicans pause.
 "Including both the cost and a Democratic president’s name could also have inclined many Republicans to oppose it," Bowman said.
 Including the cost of the legislation "highlights a downside of the bill without necessarily drawing attention to its benefits," said Burden.
 Andrew E. Smith, director of the University of New Hampshire Survey Center, said the wording of the questions is critical, because most people probably don’t know the details about what is in the American Rescue Plan.
 "I would be surprised that more than 2% of the public could actually tell you what is in the proposal, so they are simply relying on the wording of the question — who favors it, who opposes it, what the question says it will do etc.," Smith said.
 Our ruling
 Biden said, "The vast majority of the American people" support Biden’s $1.9 trillion rescue plan, "including a majority of Republicans."
 The White House cited a poll by CBS that found 70% of Republicans approve of Congress passing an additional economic relief package to provide funds to people and businesses affected by the coronavirus outbreak. But two other polls that included more details in their questions — Quinnipiac and SurveyMonkey/New York Times — found less than majority support among Republicans for the American Rescue Plan.
 All three polls showed strong overall support for the plan.
 We rate this statement Half True. 
 
 
 RELATED: Joe Biden exaggerates support among economists for his $1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief plan
 RELATED: What’s in Joe Biden’s $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan?
 RELATED: What you need to know about the budget reconciliation process
A health care startup linked to the family of Jared Kushner recently launched a website to help Americans assess their symptoms for the novel coronavirus and locate nearby testing centers.
 The timing of Oscar Health’s testing locator coincided with President Donald Trump’s surprise announcement of a partnership with Google to build a similar website for the Bay Area.
 Perhaps it’s not surprising, then, that a rumor circulating on social media claims that Trump "tapped" his son-in-law’s company for a testing-related project.
 "So Oscar Health, the company tapped by Trump to profit from COVID tests, is a Kushner company," the March 15 Facebook post says. "Imagine that, profits over national safety."
 The post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The company does have a Kushner-family connection, and Jared Kushner has played a role in the White House’s coronavirus response efforts. But the Facebook post goes slightly too far in claiming that Trump "tapped" Oscar Health to profit from COVID-19 testing. 
 What’s Jared Kushner’s connection to Oscar Health?
 Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law and senior adviser, is connected to Oscar Health through his brother Joshua, a co-founder and investor in the health insurance start-up.
 Mother Jones reported that a 2013 report from the New York State Department of Financial Services showed Jared Kushner was also a big player in Oscar early on.
 The state report showed that, as of 2013, Oscar’s parent corporation was partly owned by Thrive Capital Partners III LP, which in turn was owned by Thrive Partners III GP LLC. The report listed both Jared and Joshua Kushner as owners of Thrive.
 "Jared Kushner and Joshua Kushner are deemed the ultimate controlling persons in Oscar’s holding company system," the government report said.
 Mother Jones also identified a 2018 New York State Department of Financial Services report, which said that as of December 2015, Joshua Kushner was "the ultimate controlling person."
 Public financial disclosure forms for Jared Kushner and his wife, Ivanka Trump, show that the couple owned and received capital gains from shares of Thrive in 2017 and 2018 but divested from Thrive-associated funds in 2017. Their 2019 disclosures show no earnings from Thrive. 
 Jared Kushner did seek advice from Joshua Kushner’s father-in-law, a physician, when helping to craft the White House’s coronavirus response, according to the New York Times.
 Is Oscar Health making profits from COVID-19 tests?
 It’s too soon to tell how much Oscar Health could profit off the coronavirus crisis. As an insurer, the company is not manufacturing or conducting tests, as far as we could tell. 
 Oscar Health did not respond to multiple requests for comment. But we were able to complete Oscar’s risk assessment free of charge, and the page for locating testing centers said "the cost of COVID-19 testing for Oscar members at any facility is $0."
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bloggers
 
 
 stated on November 16, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Athletes are collapsing with heart-related issues due to the COVID-19 vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • December 1, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On March 18, Trump signed into law a relief package that makes coronavirus tests — and health care provider visits that result in the ordering of coronavirus tests — free for patients.
 It’s possible that Oscar could still charge customers for health services associated with seeking a coronavirus test when a test isn’t ultimately produced, however.
 Did Trump "tap" Oscar Health to help with testing?
 We found no evidence that Trump formally tasked Oscar Health with helping to ramp up testing for the coronavirus, or that the company’s testing website was created at the White House’s request. (The White House declined to comment on the record.)
 Business Insider reported that the company agreed to share the code it used to power its online portal for free with the HHS Department, which is building a similar website.
 "Last week, the Oscar team built a COVID-19 risk assessment and testing center locator for our members," a spokeswoman for Oscar told Business Insider. "The U.S government asked if we could share our code so that they could customize it for the website they are developing."
 HHS reached out to Oscar about the code on March 13, according to Business Insider. That’s the same day that Oscar rolled out its online portal in a press release. It’s also the same day that Trump announced a partnership with Google to build a similar website.
 It’s important to plan for COVID-19, even if you’re not currently experiencing symptoms. We’ve created a survey and the country’s first testing center locator to help you understand your risk and make a plan for you and your family. Find out more: https://t.co/KJxwccacRV pic.twitter.com/nlK47xhNtj— Oscar (@OscarHealth) March 13, 2020 
 That timing likely fueled speculation on social media about an improper link between Oscar Health’s project and the White House’s broader testing efforts. 
 As the Verge reported, a diagram that the White House displayed during a press briefing that day resembled the step-by-step description Oscar Health gave in its press release.
 
 Dr. Deborah Birx, White House coronavirus response coordinator, speaks during a news conference about the coronavirus at the White House on March 13, 2020, in Washington. (AP/Vucci)
 But in reference to the diagram shown at the March 13 White House press conference, a White House spokesperson told Mother Jones that "Oscar had no involvement in this."
 HHS referred us to the White House without comment.
 Our ruling
 A Facebook post says: "So Oscar Health, the company tapped by Trump to profit from covid tests, is a Kushner company. Imagine that, profits over national safety."
 The Kushner family is connected to Oscar Health, a health insurance company that recently launched a website to help locate nearby testing centers for the novel coronavirus. 
 Business Insider reported that Oscar Health shared the code it developed with HHS after it made its online portal public. But we found no evidence that Trump formally designated the company to help with the White House’s COVID-19 testing efforts.
 We rate this post Half True.
Sen. Marco Rubio, R. Fla., claimed that President Joe Biden talks like a centrist, but is "governing like someone from the far-left."
 "He has issued more executive fiats than anyone in such a short period of time, ever, more than Obama, more than Trump, more than anyone," Rubio said in a video.
 Is that true?
 Rubio tweeted the video shortly before 8 a.m. Jan. 22, so we evaluated Rubio’s claim based on actions Biden had taken up to that point (Jan. 20-21).
 Setting aside the political implications of the word "fiat," we found that available evidence supports Rubio’s assessment: Biden’s use of the executive power in his first two days far outpaced that of his predecessors.
 Rubio’s office did not respond to our requests for information.
 
 
 
 Available evidence backs Rubio’s claim
 The total number of presidential directives signed by Biden during his first two days in office is greater than the number signed by Presidents Donald Trump and Barack Obama over the same period.
 Biden issued 17 executive orders on his first two days in office, compared with Trump who issued one and Obama who issued two. Biden issued three proclamations, while Trump and Obama each issued one.
 Executive orders state how to manage the operations of the executive branch of the federal government. Proclamations communicate information on holidays, commemorations, special observances, trade, and policy.
 The Office of the Federal Register numbers each executive order and proclamation consecutively as part of a series and publishes them in the daily Federal Register after the White House sends over the information. Other presidential documents, such as memoranda and notices, are not numbered but are also published.
 The Office of the Federal Register is in the process of digitizing documents published prior to 1994. So we were unable to use that source to compare Biden’s actions with all other presidents. We turned instead to the American Presidency Project, a nonpartisan source of presidential documents hosted at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
 If Rubio was referring to a president’s first two days in office (instead of any two-day period), the available documents show that he is correct dating back to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, whose first inauguration was in 1933, said Gerhard Peters, a political science professor at Citrus College and co-director of the American Presidency Project.
 The available record before FDR isn’t complete enough to say definitively whether Rubio is also right about earlier presidents, but experts said it’s likely that his claim still holds.
 "Before FDR, presidents simply did not charge into office as prepared for action," said John Woolley, co-director of American Presidency Project and professor emeritus of political science at UCSB. "Even Lincoln, judging by the record assembled by (his secretaries John G. Nicolay and John Hay), did not fire off as many orders as Biden despite there already being an active revolt in progress."
 Many of Biden’s executive orders target the pandemic
 Rubio used the word "fiat" — a politicized term that would suggest Biden rushed in sweeping and long-lasting policy changes. However, Biden in his first two days issued 10 executive orders and one memorandum to address a specific issue that’s actively affecting the entire nation: the coronavirus pandemic. Biden was sworn into office around the time the United States recorded about 400,000 deaths from COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus.
 Here’s a rundown of those specific actions:
 Executive order mandating use of masks on federal property
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Executive order creating the position of COVID-19 response coordinator
 Executive order requiring masks in all forms of public transportation
 Executive order to develop and expand access to COVID-19 treatments
 Executive order to improve the collection and sharing of COVID-19 data
 Executive order to secure supplies necessary for responding to the pandemic
 Executive order to ensure equitable pandemic response and recovery
 Executive order to support the reopening and continuing operation of schools
 Executive order to protect workers from COVID-19 under the Occupational Safety and Health Act
 Executive order establishing the COVID-19 Pandemic Testing Board
 Memorandum extending federal support to governors’ use of the National Guard in their COVID-19 response
 "No one would doubt the need for executive action to deal with an overwhelming health crisis, so this crisis situation makes this a unique point in time," said John Frendreis, a professor emeritus of political science at Loyola University Chicago. "Rubio’s comment is technically correct, although when taken together with the context, it is exaggerated."
 Besides those COVID-19 measures, Biden’s actions included an order requiring an ethics pledge from his appointees and directives revoking several of Trump’s policies.
 It’s become more common for presidents to issue executive actions and for the other party to dislike it, said Daniel Gitterman, a public policy professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
 "When it’s the president of the opposite party, they call it executive fiat, and when it’s the president of the same party, they call it bold action," Gitterman said.
 According to the Federal Register, Trump signed 220 executive orders during his four years in office. Throughout their eight-year administrations, Obama signed 276 executive orders and George W. Bush signed 291.
 Our ruling
 Rubio said Biden "has issued more executive fiats than anyone in such a short period of time, ever, more than Obama, more than Trump, more than anyone."
 Fiats" is a politically loaded term and ignores that many of Biden’s directives were specific to the ongoing pandemic.
 Still, the available evidence on the number of directives issued supports Rubio’s claim.
 We rate it True.
 RELATED: Which campaign promises did Joe Biden tackle first?
 RELATED: Here's what Donald Trump did his first week as president of the United States
The novel coronavirus reached the NBA this week, with Utah Jazz center Rudy Gobert testing positive in Oklahoma City moments before the Jazz were set to tip off against the Thunder.
 The development led the NBA to suspend its season. The Jazz said in a statement that after diagnostic tests were administered to team players, staff and traveling beat reporters, only one of the reported 58 people tested in connection with Gobert — guard Donovan Mitchell, who confirmed his positive test on Instagram — was found to be carrying COVID-19.
 The Jazz’s quick access to 58 coronavirus tests seemed at odds with the fact that the United States has lagged behind other countries where testing has been more widespread. 
 "Some states are only getting 50 tests per day, and the Utah Jazz got 58?" said Michael Dougherty, a senior writer for the National Review, in a March 12 tweet.
 Some states are only getting 50 tests per day, and the Utah Jazz got 58? 
 
 If tests are going to remain scarce, how they're distributed will be a subject not just of controversy, but of fury and reprisal. https://t.co/Eip3nNOOXR— Michael Brendan Dougherty (@michaelbd) March 12, 2020 
 We wondered how the Jazz team personnel got their hands on COVID-19 tests in a matter of hours, and what kind of access states have had to testing by comparison.
 We found that Dougherty’s claim lined up with the information that’s available, despite some murkiness around the number of tests that have been conducted across the country.
 How the Jazz got tests so quickly
 After a sprinting medical staffer alerted referees to Gobert’s confirmed infection minutes before the game was supposed to start, the state of Oklahoma quickly completed tests for 58 people close to the organization who had come in contact with Gobert. 
 
 The results for those 58 people came back within nine to 10 hours, said Andy Larsen, a Jazz beat writer for the Salt Lake Tribune who was tested for having been in recent contact with Gobert.
 The process was fast, with medical professionals taking throat and sinus swabs from the team personnel at the arena, Larsen said. "It really only does take like two minutes," he said.
 The specimens were then shipped to Oklahoma’s public health lab, where they were tested overnight using test kits provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said Jaime Dukes, a spokesperson for the Oklahoma State Department of Health.
 Dukes told us the Oklahoma lab has been running tests since March 6, and that the lab has completed roughly 150 tests since then, including the tests on the Jazz personnel. 
 That means many of the tests in Oklahoma were completed in one night. Dukes said that’s because Oklahoma has been following the CDC’s case-definition requirements, which currently say that clinicians should use judgment to decide if a symptomatic patient should be tested.
 Clinicians are supposed to prioritize people with serious symptoms, people who are older or have underlying medical conditions, and people who had close contact with a confirmed or suspected coronavirus patient or recently traveled to an affected area, according to the CDC.
 "That honestly was the first incident we’ve had where 58 people at one time needed to be tested," Dukes said. "We’ve been meeting the demand, but we are being very clear about our criteria for testing."
 NBA spokesman Tim Frank said Oklahoma health officials directed the Jazz testing without intervention from the NBA, and that there was "nothing we did to accelerate it."
 But state epidemiologist Laurence Burnsed, speaking at a March 12 press conference, said the NBA has "policies in place" that helped Gobert get tested quickly. NBA team trainers regularly monitor players for illness and work with local physicians when needed, Burnsed said.
 According to the Associated Press, a number of other NBA franchises are having employees self-quarantine or get tested after coming into contact with Gobert and Mitchell in recent weeks. 
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How many tests are being conducted per state?
 It’s hard to precisely say how many tests the U.S. has administered, in part because the CDC has outsourced some responsibility to states as well as private, academic and commercial labs. There’s no centralized database tracking everything.
 Testing in the U.S. was slowed from the get-go by flaws with the government’s early test kits and barriers that have been relaxed but still limit who can get tested. 
 Stephen Hahn, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said March 7 that public health labs have the ability to test a total of 75,000 people. 
 He also said 1.1 million tests had been shipped to private labs, with another roughly 1 million on the way and still more to come from other academic and commercial labs.
 The U.S. took another step toward increasing its capabilities on March 13 when it gave over $1 million to two companies to develop new, one-hour tests.
 It’s not clear that those capabilities are being met, however. 
 According to a tracker from the American Enterprise Institute, the different labs running tests throughout the U.S. should have been capable of cumulatively testing more than 25,000 per day, at least as of March 13. (Dougherty is also a visiting fellow at AEI.)
 Updated to reflect #coronavirus testing lab capacity at Assurance Scientific Labs and increased capacity in CA public health labs, Stanford, and NorthShore University HealthSystems pic.twitter.com/mEZgrkHbUF— COVID-19 Test Capacity (@COVID2019tests) March 13, 2020 
 Plus, the number of tests isn’t the same as the number of people who have been tested. Not everyone seeking a coronavirus test can get one. Even sick people have been denied.
 As of March 12, the CDC’s website said it had tested roughly 3,903 specimens in CDC labs, plus about 9,721 in public health labs across the U.S.’s various states. 
 Those numbers, while incomplete, pale in comparison with countries like South Korea, which ramped up testing weeks ago by setting up drive-thru screening clinics.
 "Widespread testing was a key component of China and South Korea's response strategy," said Caitlin Rivers, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. "Both countries have made significant progress in controlling their outbreaks."
 The U.S. pace has been more sluggish. Dougherty told us his claim could be traced to early March reports from the Atlantic and Buzzfeed News, which said public health labs in states such as Hawaii and Arkansas were capable at the time of running fewer than 50 tests per day.
 Dougherty also cited a recent report from Yahoo News, which relied on state and federal data from the COVID Tracking Project, a project of the Atlantic run by reporters and data scientists. 
 The project tracks the numbers presented on state government websites to provide a more accurate overall testing count. (While the CDC website highlights the number of specimens tested, the COVID Tracking Project tracks the number of people.)
 The Yahoo News article noted that the COVID Tracking Project counted 2,728 people tested by states and the District of Columbia on March 10, for an average of less than 55 per state. Some states tested fewer than 50 that day, according to the project’s tally. The project reported that 2,219 people were tested by states on March 11, or roughly 43 people per state.
 Our daily 4pm ET update is out. The topline number is not good: ~10000 people tested, according to our state-level data, which cannot track all negative tests. That's a smaller day-over-day increase than yesterday.
 
 The ramp is not happening fast enough. https://t.co/Zc39AZVRge pic.twitter.com/2UfGBYOifc— The COVID Tracking Project (@COVID19Tracking) March 12, 2020 
 Our ruling
 Dougherty said "some states are only getting 50 tests per day, and the Utah Jazz got 58."
 Oklahoma public health officials quickly completed tests on 58 people who had had recent contact with Gobert, the Jazz’s center, after he tested positive for COVID-19. 
 It’s not clear how many tests each state is running per day. But Dougherty’s claim that "some states are only getting 50 tests per day" lines up with what had been reported at the time the claim was made.
 We rate this statement True.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis has resisted pleas from some of his state’s mayors to enact statewide measures to fight COVID-19, such as a mask mandate and the power to adopt local restrictions.
 The day before Florida recorded its 1 millionth case, DeSantis told reporters that states in lockdown mode are faring worse than Florida.
 "So I hear people say, ‘Oh, well, Florida is open, and they’re having increased cases,’" DeSantis said Nov. 30. "Well, OK, the states that are locked down are increasing at twice the rate we are. If you look at the per capita cases, in a lot of these states that have closed schools, businesses shuttered, some of them even post stay-at-home orders there, you see a huge increase in these cases."
 We checked DeSantis’ claim that "the states that are locked down are increasing at twice the rate we are." We found that while Florida is doing comparatively well at the moment, DeSantis overstated the correlation between cases and lockdown rules. It’s likely that other factors beyond just a state’s rules are affecting COVID-19 rates.
 The state of lockdowns nationwide
 In an effort to reduce the spread of the virus, states have enacted — and then sometimes relaxed or lifted — various restrictions, including mask mandates, limits on restaurant capacity, and bans on large gatherings.
 DeSantis, a Republican, issued an order Sept. 25 that generally lifted restrictions on businesses and suspended fines for people who didn’t comply. While many stores and restaurants have adopted their own mask and social distancing rules, Floridians have still packed into some bars and other gathering spots. 
 In November, cases in Florida were on the rise, but unlike some other governors, DeSantis said he wouldn’t issue new mandates.
 Reviewing the evidence
 We asked Fred Piccolo, a spokesperson for DeSantis, for evidence to explain the governor’s claim that cases in states that are locked down are increasing twice as fast as in Florida.
 Piccolo cited a New York Times state-by-state analysis, updated Nov. 30, showing which states have businesses that are mostly closed, which ones have no restrictions, and which ones are "mixed." The Times also published a map showing states with stay-at-home orders or advisories.
 Piccolo then used the Covid Act Now website to calculate the number of cases and hospitalizations per 100,000 residents in some of the states with more stringent restrictions.
 We checked the numbers ourselves. We focused on the states that the Times had cited as enacting the most stringent restrictions for either businesses or residents as of Nov. 30, as well as the states that had a medium level of restrictions on both businesses and residents. All told, 10 states qualified for this group of states with high coronavirus-related restrictions. (Our list of 10 states was slightly different from the one Piccolo provided, but not substantively so.)
 Broadly speaking, we found that Florida’s record, at least as of the beginning of December, compared favorably with most states across the country, including those with tighter restrictions. Specifically, in comparisons of coronavirus cases deaths and hospitalizations per capita, Florida ranked among the best, and better than some of the more highly regulated states. (Click on the chart to see separate comparisons for cases, deaths, and hospitalizations.)
 
 
 So there’s something to what DeSantis said. However, there are also some important caveats.
 First, some of the more highly regulated states performed better than Florida did. For instance, Oregon, Washington state and California had fewer coronavirus deaths per capita than Florida did, while Massachusetts, Oregon and Washington state had lower hospitalization rates.
 Second, DeSantis’ reference to "twice the rate" undercuts the strength of his argument. Out of the 10 states with the most stringent rules, only about half had per capita cases, deaths and hospitalizations that were twice as high as Florida’s rate.
 Third, Florida may be faring better than many other states in fighting the coronavirus, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that a lack of restrictions is to credit for better coronavirus statistics.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aaron Rodgers
 
 
 stated on November 5, 2021 in an interview on the Pat McAfee Show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "This idea that it's the pandemic of the unvaccinated, it's just a total lie."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Gabrielle Settles • November 8, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The following chart shows 27 states, including Florida, that the New York Times’ analysis found to have the least restrictive COVID-19 rules on businesses and residents. 
 
 
 Once again, Florida ranks well compared with the other states on cases, deaths and hospitalizations. But many of the states that followed similarly low levels of restrictions as Florida did ended up with far worse outcomes. 
 We found that 12 of the low-restriction states had double Florida’s case rate, eight had double the rate of deaths, and nine had double the rate of hospitalizations. Five states had double Florida’s rate in each of the three statistics — South Dakota, North Dakota, Montana, Nebraska, and Indiana — and another five states had twice Florida’s rate for two statistics. 
 RELATED: In Nebraska, skyrocketing cases of COVID-19 put localities, governor on separate tracks
 It’s also important to note that some states added or tightened restrictions in November, making the impact so far difficult to evaluate.
 Why might Florida be doing relatively well?
 The comparison with other lightly regulated states suggests that Florida may be doing relatively well for reasons other than its low-regulation policy.
 For example, Florida’s weather makes it easier for residents to eat and gather outdoors, even at this time of year. Scientists have generally said that the virus passes from person to person less easily outdoors than in cramped indoor spaces.
 "I think it’s reasonable to say that the warmer weather certainly plays a part in Florida’s relative success," said Brooke Nichols, an infectious-disease mathematical modeler at the Boston University School of Public Health. "It’s no longer incredibly hot, necessitating indoor gathering for air conditioning, but not too cold that people need to congregate indoors for heat."
 In addition, it’s hard to establish causation: Is it the loose regulation that helps reduce infection rates, or is it the low infection rates that allow for looser regulations? 
 Miami-Dade, the state’s most populous county, had an increase in cases following the removal of the mitigation strategies, said Mary Jo Trepka, chair of the Department of Epidemiology at Florida International University.
 "We don’t know how bad it will get," Trepka said.
 It’s also important to remember that states aren’t walled-off jurisdictions. During much of the pandemic, Florida has been open to tourists, which means we don’t know whether coronavirus transmission within Florida is increasing infections in other states after those tourists return home, said Marissa Levine, a public health professor at the University of South Florida.
 Jason L. Salemi, associate professor of epidemiology at the University of South Florida, cautions that the success DeSantis claimed is only in comparison with other states, and that cases and hospitalizations have been rising over the last few weeks. "That, to me, is indicative of how serious the situation is across the country," he said.
 Our ruling
 DeSantis said, "The states that are locked down are increasing at twice the rate we are" in Florida.
 Currently, Florida does have relatively low rates of coronavirus cases, deaths and hospitalizations. But the connection between those statistics and Florida’s light restrictions on businesses and residents is less clear-cut than DeSantis suggests.
 Only about half of the 10 most stringently regulated states saw rates of cases, deaths and hospitalizations that were twice as high as Florida’s — DeSantis’ benchmark.
 Meanwhile, numerous other states that followed the same less restrictive policies as Florida have fared far worse than Florida. This suggests that factors other than behavioral regulations, such as warm weather, may play a role in keeping coronavirus infections relatively low in Florida.
 We rate the statement Half True.
The headline on a widely shared YouTube video suggested that a Harvard University study found that vaccinations aren’t effective in fighting COVID-19.
 "Covid SURGES Among Most Vaxxed Communities Says Harvard Study," the headline said.
 The video was shared on Facebook and flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
 The author of the study said the headline misrepresents its conclusions.
 The study’s conclusion was not that vaccinations don’t impact infection, but that steps such as masking and social distancing should be used along with vaccination to fight the pandemic.
 The video was hosted by comedian and commentator Jimmy Dore, who cited a study published Sept. 30 in the peer-reviewed European Journal of Epidemiology. The study’s lead author, S.V. Subramanian, is a professor of population health and geography at Harvard.
 The introduction to the journal article noted a surge in cases in the United States and Israel. But the study itself analyzed the relationship between the percentage of population fully vaccinated and new COVID-19 cases reported over a seven-day period across 68 countries and across 2,947 counties in the United States. The periods varied slightly by area, but were in late August and early September.
 During that time frame, the study found, countries with a higher percentage of population fully vaccinated had a higher rate of new COVID-19 cases per 1 million people. 
 The findings were similar in the U.S. Of the five counties with the highest vaccination rates, three of them — Chattahoochee (Georgia), McKinley (New Mexico) and Arecibo (Puerto Rico) counties — had above 90% of their population fully vaccinated while also being identified by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as high-transmission counties.
 But the study’s message was not that vaccination doesn’t work. It was that other steps should also be employed to reduce case rates.
 
 Featured Fact-check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infowars
 
 
 stated on November 4, 2021 in a video
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Sending your child to school” on a day when vaccines are being administered “is implied consent” for getting the COVID-19 vaccine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By Kayla Steinberg • November 10, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "The sole reliance on vaccination as a primary strategy to mitigate COVID-19 and its adverse consequences needs to be re-examined, especially considering the delta variant and the likelihood of future variants. Other pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions may need to be put in place alongside increasing vaccination rates," the study concluded.
 The study noted reports of declines in immunity from mRNA vaccines after six months. It also noted that vaccines offer strong protection against severe hospitalization and death.
 "In summary, even as efforts should be made to encourage populations to get vaccinated, it should be done so with humility and respect. Stigmatizing populations can do more harm than good. Importantly, other non-pharmacological prevention efforts (e.g., the importance of basic public health hygiene with regards to maintaining safe distance or handwashing, promoting better frequent and cheaper forms of testing) needs to be renewed in order to strike the balance of learning to live with COVID-19 in the same manner we continue to live a 100 years later with various seasonal alterations of the 1918 Influenza virus."
 Subramanian told PolitiFact:
 "Concluding from this analysis that vaccines are useless is misleading and inaccurate. Rather, the analysis supports vaccination as an important strategy for reducing infection and transmission, along with handwashing, mask-wearing, proper ventilation and physical distancing."
 We rated False a claim that it’s safer to be unvaccinated than vaccinated against COVID-19. 
 In September, the CDC analyzed vaccine effectiveness across 13 jurisdictions from April 4 to July 17 and matched that data to vaccine registries from those areas. It found that after delta became the most dominant variant, unvaccinated people were five times more likely to be infected than fully vaccinated people, and more than 10 times more likely to be hospitalized or die. 
 Our ruling
 The headline on a YouTube video suggested that vaccinations don’t help fight COVID-19, claiming that the disease "surges among most vaxxed communities," according to a Harvard study.
 The study did find high rates of infection in communities with high rates of vaccination. But the conclusion was not that vaccinations are ineffective. It was that prevention measures such as testing and distancing should be employed along with vaccinations to fight the epidemic.
 The statement is partially accurate but takes things out of context. We rate it Half True.
An online article claims US President Joe Biden ordered the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to withhold health benefits from former members of the military who have not been vaccinated against Covid-19. But the department says the claim is untrue, and the article appears on a website that states its content is "made up.""Biden Orders VA To Withhold Health Benefits From Unvaccinated Veterans," says the headline of an article on DelawareOhioNews.com."Beginning November 1, any veteran seeking medical care at a VA facility must have had at least one shot of the vaccine to receive services under their medical benefits package" as "part of an aggressive new initiative to combat the Covid-19 pandemic," the article says. A screenshot of an article taken on September 17, 2021The article -- which spread as a screenshot on Facebook here and here and Instagram here -- has drawn angry comments from people who appeared to take it as fact."Now this is out of control. FU Biden these Soldiers have rights," one Facebook user wrote.Biden has mandated vaccination or weekly testing for federal employees, and the Pentagon aims to require troops to receive the shots. But the claim that unvaccinated veterans will be denied benefits is false.â€œThe president has not and will not withhold benefits to veterans who choose not to be vaccinated. The spread of this misinformation is extremely detrimental to our veterans and their families and should cease immediately," Terrence Hayes, the VA's press secretary, said in a statement sent to AFP.A disclaimer appears in fine print under a lengthy comments section at the bottom of the DelawareOhioNews.com article, saying that "everything on this website is made up. Do not rely on anything said here."The website also includes a page titled "Legal Statements" that says: "All stories herein are parodies (satire, fiction, fake, not real) of people and/or actual events. All names are made up (unless used in a parody of public figures) and any similarity is purely coincidental."AFP Fact Check has debunked other inaccurate claims related to Covid-19 here.
Follow us on 
  
  
  WHO also introduced one 
  
  
  Poynter Institutes International Fact-Checking Network (IFCN) on Monday launched its chatbot on WhatsApp to help two billion users of the Facebook-owned instant messaging platform to check the veracity of information related to COVID-19. The IFCN's bot connects people with independent fact-checkers in more than 70 countries and also with the largest database of debunked falsehoods related to the new coronavirus.
 By using the IFCN's bot on WhatsApp, citizens from all over the world will be able to easily check whether a piece of content about COVID-19 has already been rated as false by professional fact-checkers.
 Since January, more than 80 fact-checking organisations from 74 countries have identified more than 4,000 hoaxes related to the novel coronavirus. All this information now forms the CoronaVirusFacts database and is updated daily by the IFCN so chatbot users can navigate and easily access its content.
 
 The IFCN's bot also provides users with a global directory of fact-checking organisations. The system is capable of identifying the user's country via the person's mobile country code and then providing them with their closest fact-checking organisations. The person can then submit a piece of information for review directly to its local fact-checker or visit its website to learn more about what has been circulating in the region.
 
  
  
  
 
 "Billions of users rely on WhatsApp to stay in touch with their friends and families every month. Since bad actors use every single platform to disseminate falsehoods, to mislead others during such troubling times, fact-checkers' work is more important than ever," Baybars Orsek, IFCN's Director, said in a statement.
 "The IFCN chatbot will allow users to search for fact checks and get connected with fact-checkers in their countries from their smartphones. The chatbot will also serve as a way to direct people to their local fact-checkers' websites," Orsek said.
 IFCN's bot is free to use. Users should save +1 (727) 2912606 as a contact number and text the word ‘hi' to get the bot started. Initially, the bot will be available only in English, but other languages, including Hindi, Spanish and Portuguese, will follow soon, IFCN said. WhatsApp recently launched several initiatives in support of the global fight against the coronavirus pandemic, one of them being a $1 million grant to IFCN.
 "WhatsApp recently provided a grant to Poynter's IFCN to support the valuable work of its verified signatories around the world in combating COVID-19 misinformation," said Ben Supple, Public Policy Manager & Global Election Lead at WhatsApp.
 "We are very pleased to now be able to support IFCN's essential fact-checking work with the launch of this important service for WhatsApp users," Supple said.
 Latest technology reviews, news and more
As the number of positive cases of coronavirus in India rise to 298, with four deaths reported so far, the face masks are selling like hot cakes. While face masks don't guarantee a cent per cent guarantee of not being infected from the virus, they are certainly effective in capturing the tiny droplets, the main transmission route of COVID-19. However, mask-wearers must keep in mind that aerosols, or as the tiny droplets are known, can penetrate the masks.
 
 Worryingly, aerosol particles could also be transmitted through eyes.
 
 Where masks can prove effective is in controlling the spread of virus, if around those already infected or showing symptoms. If someone is exhibiting symptoms, face masks can help in keeping the virus from being transmitted to other people.
 
  
  
  
 
 
 The Guardian cited certain studies as claiming that wearing a mask could afford a five-fold protection from virus, versus no protection at all.
 
 The World Health Organisation has issued the following instructions on the usage of masks in these times:
 
 
 If you are healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you are taking care of a person with suspected 2019-nCoV infection.
 Wear a mask if you are coughing or sneezing.
 Masks are effective only when used in combination with frequent hand-cleaning with alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water.
 If you wear a mask, then you must know how to use it and dispose of it properly.
 
 
 Also read: Vasundhara Raje, Dushyant Singh test negative for COVID-19
 Latest India News
Twitter has apologised for going into overdrive in labelling certain tweets that actually did not violate its policies around 5G and Covid-19, saying it would soon fix the issue. The micro-blogging platform said it is now working on to improve its algorithms how it labels tweets with problematic 5G or coronavirus content after several users reported their unrelated tweets are being flagged with a 5G and coronavirus fact-check label.
 
 "In the last few weeks, you may have seen Tweets with labels linking to additional info about Covid-19. Not all of those Tweets had potentially misleading content associating Covid-19 and 5G," the Twitter Support team tweeted on Saturday.
 
 "We apologise for any confusion and we're working to improve our labelling process". Twitter began fact-checking tweets that linked 5G and coronavirus earlier this month, by adding the label that reads "get the facts about Covid-19 with "No, 5G isn't causing coronavirus" as its title.
 
  
  
  
 
 
 Twitter said: "As we improve this process to be more precise, our goal is to show fewer labels on unrelated Tweets". With some accounts spreading false information about the fifth-generation cellular network (5G), linking the technology with coronavirus, Twitter in April took a decision to take down such messages inciting harmful activities.
 
 The move was part of Twitter's effort to provide people with reliable information, connect with others, and follow what is happening in real-time amid the coronavirus pandemic. While conspiracy theories surrounding 5G started surfacing much before Covid-19 hit the world, the pandemic only increased their spread with some messages even blaming 5G for the disease.
 
 "We have broadened our guidance on unverified claims that incite people to engage in a harmful activity, could lead to the destruction or damage of critical 5G infrastructure or could lead to widespread panic, social unrest, or large-scale disorder," Twitter had said.
 
 Latest Technology News
A death review committee set up by Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) will assess the cause of death of the 68-year-old Philippines national who passed away in a private hospital in Mumbai on Sunday night. The man was initially admitted to the BMC-run Kasturba Hospital. Days before his death, he had tested negative for SARS-CoV-2, the virus from the coronavirus family that causes COVID-19.
 The BMC committee will assess whether he died of COVID-19, or renal failure with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
 
 What is the history of this case?https://images.indianexpress.com/2020/08/1x1.png
 The man was part of a group of nine Philippines nationals who arrived in Mumbai on March 3. He then took a train to New Delhi, and returned to Mumbai on March 10. On March 12 afternoon, he developed symptoms of flu, and was taken to a local doctor. On March 13, he tested positive for COVID-19, and was admitted to Kasturba Hospital.
 With co-morbidities like diabetes and asthma, his condition remained critical, and he was put on ventilator support. In between, he developed kidney complications, and was taken to the BMC’s B Y L Nair Hospital for dialysis. He was tested in accordance with protocol and, a few days ago, his nasopharyngeal swab (swab taken from the back of the nose and throat) tested negative for the novel coronavirus.
 The man was then discharged, and was shifted to a private superspecialty hospital for treatment of his kidneys. This is where he died. Dr Daksha Shah, BMC’s deputy executive health officer, said that since the man had tested negative, his death is so far not being considered a COVID-19 death.
 Why must the case be studied further?
 The key question is: Is a nasal or throat swab sufficient to rule out the virus? That is, can a person have the virus in their body even if their respiratory samples test negative?
 A new study in The Lancet Gastroenterology and Hepatology shows that the novel coronavirus can remain in the faeces of patients for five weeks after their respiratory samples test negative. (‘Prolonged presence of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in faecal samples’, Yongjian Wu et al.: published March 19, The researchers analysed respiratory and faecal matter of 74 COVID-19 patients from January 16 to March 15 at the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University in Zhuhai, China. In 55% of cases (41 of 74 patients), the respiratory samples (throat swabs) tested positive for coronavirus for 16.7 days, and faecal matter tested positive for 27.9 days after the first onset of symptoms, the study found.
 The implication is this: Even if a confirmed case returns negative for the novel coronavirus in a nasal swab test, the virus may still be in body.
 That there is a possibility that he may have still had the virus in his body fluids, even though his respiratory samples tested negative. Given his age, asthma, diabetes, and later renal complications, the virus added to the problem and worsened his condition.
 The Lancet study found that the virus RNA was “actively replicating in the patients’ gastrointestinal tract” even after clearance from their respiratory tract. It also said that there is a possibility of viral shedding for nearly five weeks in the faeces of infected person. The virus could remain in the environment for days, and could be transmitted by the faecal-oral transmission mode, although this is yet to been detected in a COVID-19 case.
 Similar transmission patterns were observed during the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) outbreaks, both of which were caused by pathogens of the coronavirus family. Dr Om Srivastava, an infectious diseases expert who is a member of the death review committee, said: “Further tests are needed to check viral load in saliva, tears, semen as well. Zika virus remained in semen for nine months.”
 Blood, urine, and stool samples of confirmed COVID-19 patients at Kasturba Hospital are being sent every day to the National Institute of Virology in Pune for analysis of viral shedding.
 What will the BMC’s panel do now?
 A member of the committee said that stool, urine, and blood samples of the Philippines national will be analysed to test for the presence of the virus, and whether viral shedding continued after he was discharged from Kasturba Hospital. The committee comprises infectious disease experts, intensive medicine doctors, and civic health officials.
 BMC has earlier taken a similar approach in deaths caused by dengue and H1N1 infection as well. In deaths of patients with several co-morbidities, a review of the medical condition is done to understand whether the infection was the direct or indirect cause of death.
 Also read | Lost sense of smell may be peculiar clue to coronavirus infection
 The first COVID-19 death in Maharashtra, a 64-year-old who had travelled to Dubai, too had tested negative for coronavirus a day before his death. He was still considered a COVID-19 death because he passed away before a second confirmatory test for the virus could be carried out. As per government guidelines, two tests must be conducted within 24 hours to rule out the presence of the virus in an infected person.
 In the case of the 68-year-old Filipino, both these tests were carried out before the presence of the virus was ruled out.
 Here’s a quick Coronavirus guide from Express Explained to keep you updated: Are smokers at high risk form coronavirus? | Can Vitamin-C prevent or cure coronavirus infection? | What exactly is community spread of coronavirus? | How long can the Covid-19 virus survive on a surface? | Amid the lockdown, what is allowed, what is prohibited?
Amid vaccine shortage in the country, the Centre is planning to test effectiveness of a single vaccine dose of Covishield instead of a double dose and also check mixing two vaccines together.
  According to a news report by NDTV, both these tests are to begin soon. Editor's Note: This article, which was originally published at 2.15 pm on June 1, 2021, was updated hours later to include the statement of Dr VK Paul, Member (Health) in NITI Aayog and Chair of the National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID-19. During the day's press briefing, he clarified that Covishield will not be changed to a single-shot schedule and there will be no mixing of vaccine jabs until scientifically proven.FactChecker spoke to experts about the effectiveness of both these strategies.Single-dose strategy The United Kingdom recently reduced the gap between the two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine to eight weeks to ensure full protection. But, researchers from Banaras Hindu University claim that a single dose of the vaccine is effective for COVID-19 recovered patients. BHU researchers studied both recovered and non-infected people and found that 90% of the non-infected people developed anti-bodies after 3-4 weeks but recovered people developed anti-bodies after first dose. "By giving single-dose to recovered people we can overcome vaccine shortage. We've also written a letter to PM in this regard," Gyaneshwer Chaubey, a professor at BHU's Zoology department, told ANI.
 While only 90% of non-infected people developed antibodies after 3-4 weeks. Recovered people developed antibodies after 1st dose. By giving single-dose to recovered people we can overcome vaccine shortage. We've also written a letter to PM in this regard: Gyaneshwer Chaubey pic.twitter.com/wuQOEcGsPAÑ ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 31, 2021 But experts absolutely disapprove of this strategy. "The decision of altering the double dosed vaccine to single dosed is only meant to hide the shortage otherwise two doses are essential to provide complete immunity," said Dr Harjit Bhatti, ex-President, AIIMS Resident Doctors' Association and National President, Progressive Medicos and Scientists Forum.
  According to a study conducted by Public Health England (PHE) and other institutions in England, a single-dose of the Astra-Zeneca vaccine in the United Kingdom was only 33% effective in protecting from the B.1.617.2 coronavirus variant as compared to 59% efficacy from two doses of the vaccine. S Vincent Rajkumar, an oncologist and professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic in the US, also called the strategy a "bad idea" in his recent tweet.
 If that's being considered, it's a bad idea. 1) See below. A single dose is insufficient protection. https://t.co/1Muhcwds4lÑ Vincent Rajkumar (@VincentRK) May 31, 2021 While the popular comparison is drawn between single dose vaccines developed by Johnson & Johnson, Sputnik Light and Oxford Astra-Zeneca developed Covishield, experts believe effectiveness of vaccines on different variants needs to be paid attention to. "Johnson & Johnson is a single dose vaccine and is an adeno-virus platform. But we do not how it performs against the B.1.617.2 variant. Before we make a hasty decision to switch from two dose to one, we need to evaluate first as to how the vaccines are working with the variant. We have already got millions of people who have got one dose of the Astra-Zeneca vaccine with a time lag of one/two/three months after their first dose. But there is no evidence yet what the effectiveness of the vaccine is in such cases," Dr Gagandeep Kang, a microbiologist, virologist and professor in Christian Medical College, Vellore, told Factchecker Neither has the current situation of the variant been evaluated nor is it not known if the vaccine is working at all, she said. "A decision certainly cannot be made without proper data just by saying that we are short of vaccines without taking into consideration of all the aspects," Dr Kang added. While seconding Dr Kang, Dr Jayadheer Babu, a critical care specialist at Guntur General Hospital and state president of Andhra Pradesh Government Doctors' Association, told Factchecker, "Covishield, after first dose, has 30% efficacy and after 15 days of second dose it has an efficacy of 80-90%. So, the entire course of the vaccine is actually one and a half months and these issues with vaccines keep evolving. Up until now we do not have any information on dose-wise antibody development and if at all there has been development of anti-bodies after the first dose, the research needs to be published, distributed and debated before coming up with the idea of single dose. Only then we accept such a move." Mixing vaccines Recently, 20 people in Uttar Pradesh's Siddharthnagar district were accidentally given two different coronavirus jabs. They were given a shot of Covishield in early April and later got the locally developed Covaxin as part of their second dose in May. "I have no problem with vaccine mixing but such mixings should not happen by accident the way it happened in Uttar Pradesh. People need to be recruited for such clinical trials with their consent where people know what and why are they recruited for the trial. This has to be conducted as a clinical trial before such practices are rolled out widely into the programme," Dr Kang told FactChecker. Experts are divided on this matter since some believe there isn't enough data to make such decisions. "Vaccine mixing is not ideal at this point since there is no data available yet to support such decisions," said Dr Babu. Several countries are conducting studies on the mix and match of vaccines. In fact, Spain and the United Kingdom recently released the data from their trials which suggests that mixing may give higher antibody levels than two doses of the same vaccine. Dr Lalit Kant, ex-Deputy Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research, said India should have studied this possibility long back. "Being the 'Pharmacy of the World' comes with responsibilities of telling the world about all these aspects prior to others. We are doing too little and too late," he concluded.
India is reeling under the second wave of COVID-19, for which it was infrastructurally and resource-wise unprepared for. The country reported more than four lakh cases on April 30, 2021, becoming the first country in the world to cross the four-lakh mark. And healthcare experts are already predicting that there'd be a third wave.
 Dr Devi Shetty, noted cardiac surgeon and chairman, Narayana Health, recently said India should be prepared for a third wave and he suggested some solutions too. "The current pandemic is likely to last for about 4 to 5 months. And then we should be prepared for the third wave," said Dr Shetty in an online address at the Symbiosis Golden Jubilee Lecture Series.Also, Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray told the state government to be prepared for a third wave of COVID-19 in July or August this year.So, FactChecker asked three public health experts what it is that they suggest India does to brace for the next wave. The responses ranged from strengthening the public healthcare workforce to a better supply chain and planning.Health workforceIn August 2020, the Indian Medical Association President Dr Rajan Sharma wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi demanding a national solatium for doctors. In the letter, he also cited that 87,000 healthcare workers were infected with the virus and 573 had died, according to government's data. In April 2021, a state-wise analysis by IMA showed that 747 doctors in the country died of COVID-19."We need to produce at least two lakh nurses and at least one and a half lakh doctors in the next few weeks who are dedicated to managing COVID for the next one year," said Dr Shetty.He suggested that the Ministry of Health along with the Indian Nursing Council consider nursing students (General Nursing and Midwifery) as graduates, and deploy them to work in COVID ICU wards for one year.Dr Shahid Jameel, virologist and director of the School of Biosciences at Ashoka University, seconded Dr Shetty and said, "We should never again be caught with inadequate infrastructure (hospitals and doctors/HCWs), poor supply chains (medicines, oxygen, etc) and most importantly, shoddy planning."On May 3, 2021, the Centre announced key decisions to boost availability of medical personnel to fight COVID-19. One of the main decisions is to prioritise medical personnel completing 100 days of Covid duty and to give them priority in forthcoming regular government recruitments. It has also been decided to deploy medical interns in COVID-19 management duties under the supervision of their faculty."The shortfall of doctors is about 33%, nurses 45%, beds 75%. So, our healthcare had been working sub-optimally even before the pandemic. While most modern nations have virtually eliminated the classical tropical infectious diseases, in India, such diseases clutter the healthcare institutions making even the time available for doctors per patient woefully just a few minutes only," Dr T Jacob John, virologist and former professor at the Christian Medical College, Vellore told FactChecker. "Moreover, doctors are not distributed evenly. Five states with 30% of the total population have 50% doctors, leaving the rest of India grossly under-served," Dr John added. Highlighting how the well-being, especially mental health, of those who see so much sickness and death is also important, Jameel said that if they are overworked, the quality of care goes down, which pushes up mortality.He suggested that to address this, the government should bring in retired doctors/healthcare workers and also deploy dentists, pharmacists and those training in alternative systems of medicine such as Unani and Ayurveda be given a short training in critical and supportive care. This would take the workload off those who are needed to care for the severely ill, explained Jameel. Scaling up vaccinationIndia began its phased vaccination programme on January 16, 2021 targeting 300 million people. It was designed to first immunise vulnerable populations based on evidence from the first wave. This included nearly 10 million healthcare, 20 million frontline workers and 270 million people above the age of 50 (those with or without comorbidities).India has also exported about 64 million vaccine doses to 70 countries. According to a United Nations (UN) spokesperson, on April 28, 2021, India turned down UN's offer of assistance from its integrated supply chain saying it has its own "robust" system to manage the logistics of getting material for dealing with the COVID-19 surge.As on May 5, 2021, India has administered more than 16 crore vaccine doses in the country of which more than 13 crore were administered as first dose and over 3 crore as second dose."Vaccines are powerful tools. While vaccines would no longer help contain the current second wave because they take 6-8 weeks to show protection, they will reduce the intensity of future outbreaks," said Dr Jameel."The task, therefore, is to vaccinate as many people as quickly as possible. This requires proper planning to ensure adequate supplies, delivery points and effective communication. Unfortunately, for reasons of hesitancy and poor communication, we lost valuable time in January and February when the daily caseload was reducing. Now, it is an uphill battle," he added.Dr Giridhar Babu, professor and head of Life Course Epidemiology at the Public Health Foundation of India told FactChecker that a combination of high vaccine coverage and mitigation measures can prove helpful."If we vaccinate a significant proportion of people and if we are careful about preventing it from the beginning then we could reduce the severity of the disease. Vaccination coupled with control measures such as containment and mitigation strategies can prevent the third wave from being worse than the first two," he said.Pandemic preparedness and mitigation planAny temporary measure is futile without having a robust public health care system, say public health experts. Dr John said we need to think politically about health."We failed to plan and failed to meet the needs. India must shift national policy and establish universal healthcare, primary, secondary and tertiary without any more loss of time. The ruling party has the necessary majority to get reforms through rapidly. The Ruling government's party must call all party meetings for consensus for spending 10% GDP, on health, on an expanding time schedule. Half of that must be for establishing public health which we have neglected for more than 70 years," the Vellore-based virologist explained.Another highlight is not forgetting health and wellness centres in urban areas. The PHFI professor suggested that there should be at least one such centre per 5,000 people with additional doctors and nurses in urban areas to promote primary healthcare so people don't have to rely on costly health services."When there is an earthquake, we have a disaster mitigation plan. But in a pandemic, we still don't have a robust plan in dealing with a health emergency," said Dr Babu."This crisis cannot be dealt with by increasing the capacity of health workers alone. We can't create four to five lakh workers just like that. Hence, we need to redistribute and use our complete workforce. This will not end with the third wave in India and therefore the day when the cases start rising we need to immediately plan on imposing lockdowns, reduce movement and use the workforce in an efficient manner. We should not be caught by surprise again," he added. Can a COVID-19 third wave be prevented?When asked this, experts told FactChecker that a third COVID-19 wave is unavoidable but that it can be delayed and reduced in severity."Based on what we have seen so far, a third wave is unavoidable. But we cannot say if it would be better or worse than the current one. That will depend upon how many people get infected and vaccinated during the next few months. The severity will depend also on how prepared we are with medical infrastructure and supply chains," said Dr Jameel.He highlighted how the severity of this wave is not because the virus has become more lethal, but because it has become more infectious and transmissible. And a solution to it is tracking emerging viral variants that can compromise preparations. "We know and can deal with what is currently contributing to the second wave. But more infectious and/or more lethal variants can easily change the future course. For this, it is important to sequence viruses in the population at sufficient density, and pay attention to what is emerging," Dr Jameel ended.
Several news headlines for over a month have read like "cases of mucormycosis or black fungus". In fact, many ministers too have been equating mucormycosis with black fungus as the infection surged during the second wave of COVID-19. For example, Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray recently tweeted, "The State has around 3,000 patients with mucormycosis or black fungus." But are the terms interchangeable? According to experts, calling mucormycosis 'Black Fungus' is a misnomer because the infection is not a recent phenomenon. FactChecker spoke to Dr Manish Munjal, an ENT specialist at Sir Ganga Ram Hospital in New Delhi, and Dr Ishwar Gilada, an infectious diseases expert, president of the AIDS Society of India and governing council member of International AIDS Society, to understand the difference between the two fungal diseases.What is Mucormycosis?Mucormycosis, previously called zygomycosis, is rare and invasive and a non-fungal infection caused by a group of molds called mucormycetes. These molds live throughout the environment and enter the body through nasal passages. "Mucormycosis is an opportunistic fungal infection. It happens when there is a compromised host immunity. Earlier, it used to infect people with HIV, cancer and those who had a liver transplant but it was quite infrequent; around two or three cases in a big hospital like Gangaram in a month. It was still deadly but we had the means to treat them. But it wasn't as high in density as it is currently," Dr Munjal told FactChecker. What is the difference between Mucormycosis and Black Fungus?According to both the doctors, the main difference is in the actual colour of the fungus and the colour of the tissue."Mucormycosis is not actually black. The fungus does not derive its name from the colour of its filaments which is the fungi itself but due to the blackening it causes on the host body it infects. The tissue becomes dark and then the skin inside the nose or the scab that forms is almost black in colour," said Dr Munjal."In medieval times, people associated the bubonic plague with Black Death. The colour of the tissue governed the name of the disease. So, when we say yellow fever, the virus is not yellow. It's the colour of the pigment, not the virus," he added.It is neither a new disease and nor does the fungus have a colour when looked at through a microscopic lens. It's the dead tissue that turns black. "There are fungi of different colours. For example, candida is white. Similarly, there are brown, grey, black, orange and yellow fungi. But the colour of mucormycosis is not black. The term which is being currently used is a misnomer," said Dr Gilada."It's better to call it mucor. It's called black fungus because it is caused in the nasal area where an ulcer is formed. Later, the ulcer becomes necros or a dead tissue which is black in colour. Hence, it's called black fungus but the fungus is not black in colour, it's the skin that becomes black. Under the microscope, mucormycosis does not really have a colour," explained the infectious diseases expert.In fact, AIIMS Director Randeep Guleria, in a press conference on May 24, 2021, asked the media to refrain from labelling the fungus with different colours as it could create confusion. "Black fungus is another family; this term got associated with mucormycosis due to the presence of black dots among the culture of white fungal colonies. In general, there are various types of fungal infections such as candida, aspergillosis, cryptococcus, histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis. Mucormycosis, candida and aspergillus are the ones observed more in those with low immunity," said Dr Guleria at the press briefing.
 
 Dr SP Kalantri, Professor of Medicine at the Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences and Medical Superintendent of Kasturba Hospital, Sevagram, also highlighted how both terms are not the same. He tweeted, "The fungus is not black. The tissues it destroys turn black." Before the second wave, COVID-19-associated invasive fungal infections were also reported during April 2020 in India. These infections have also been reported during previous epidemics such as SARS in 2003.Mucormycosis is lethal and is fatal for people whose immune system is already low. Deaths due to the fungal infection in previous coronavirus outbreaks such as SARS ranged from 25% to 73%. But this infection is not a recent phenomenon."All our knowledge that we have employed in treating COVID patients with mucormycosis stems from the experience of treating the same infection in the past. The antifungal infections in the market are from mucormycosis only," said infectious diseases expert Dr Gilada. Although technically incorrect, experts believe the correlation between the infection and the colour has resulted in more awareness and early treatment of patients. When asked if associating fungal infections with colour codes is incorrect, Dr Munjal said, "Medically it should be avoided, but it has also been a great tool in educating people. Many have been able to reach centers fast and have led to people getting themselves treated at a much higher rate as compared to before. I am happy to say that some have been treated within a week which was almost unheard of previously. That is because they could associate the symptoms with the black word. If you give medical jargon to it, it might not be able to catch the imagination of the public." While highlighting who are more at risk against the disease, the experts said the vulnerable section are the ones who have diabetes. "These COVID patients were given steroids, antibiotics and because of this, their sugar levels were high and were untreated for a long time. They were in isolation centres and hospitals. This is when the fungus got a chance to enter the nasal oxygen cannulas, pipes, and contaminated hands. This is still worrisome and if there ever is a third wave we must make sure it does not happen again," warned Dr Munjal.Why the Surge of Mucormycosis Cases During Second Wave?There are 19,727 active cases of mucormycosis across the country, according to an affidavit filed by Deputy Drugs Controller Rubina Bose of Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation on behalf of the central government in Bombay High Court on June 2, 2021. Increase in symptomatic patients, use of steroids and people needing help of oxygen cylinders were cases behind the surge in cases."In the second wave, there were more symptomatic patients than the first wave, so more people were hospitalised. Steroids were used in more people too, especially for those with diabetes which reduced their immunity significantly. When the immunity goes down the body immediately catches bacteria, fungus or parasite," said Dr Gilada."More people needed oxygen in the second wave and oxygen goes through a tube which goes to a bottle which uses water. It's called a humidifier. The water or the tube can be the source of fungus. Suppose we keep food outside for three or four days, it catches fungus. We can say that the body is like a sack of sugar which the fungus is attracted to," he explained.Prevention In terms of COVID-19 management, doctors should be very careful in scrutinising the stage of the infection. Nothing should be done to decrease the immunity of the person, Munjal said. The experts listed the following practices that can help prevent people from getting the infection:1.Antibiotics, steroids and antiviral drugs should not be used unnecessarily. Suppose the patient is losing oxygen or the fever refuses to go down after eight or nine days, doctors should carefully evaluate such patients and administer steroids under a monitored dosage system. 2.Sugar levels should be carefully monitored as well so that the immune system does not weaken.3.There should be extra effort in maintaining hygiene. A nose saline spray and mouthwash should be kept handy.4. Hospital and home equipment used to administer the nasal cannulas, oxygen moisturizing systems should be totally sterilised.
On January 2, 2021, Union Information and Broadcasting Minister Prakash Javadekar said that India was probably the only country where four different vaccines were being made ready. The Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), on January 3, cleared the way for Serum Institute of India's Covishield and Bharat Biotech's Covaxin for 'restricted use', making it the first vaccines approved to be used against COVID-19 in the country. However, while making his claim on vaccines, the Union Minister failed to mention whether these vaccine candidates were solely manufactured in India or if it was indigenously produced, developed and made in the country.
 At present, there are nine COVID-19 vaccine candidates in different phases of development in India, of which two have already received the green signal for restricted use. Of the four vaccines mentioned by the Union Minister, only two, COVAXIN and ZycoV D are indigenously produced. The remaining two have been developed (invented) in other countries but are being manufactured in India. Overall, there are four vaccine candidates which are indigenously produced.
  Vaccines Produced Indigenously In India 1. Bharat Biotech: COVAXIN Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech has developed an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in collaboration with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and National Institute of Virology (NIV). It is the first indigenous vaccine to be approved for restricted use in an emergency situation. The vaccine is developed on Vero cell platform, which has been widely accepted by regulatory authorities and has been used for over 30 years for the production of polio and rabies virus vaccines. The company has generated safety and immunogenicity data in animal species such as mice, rats, rabbits, Syrian hamsters and has also conducted challenge studies on non-human primates (Rhesus macaques) and hamsters.
 According to a press release on January 3, 2021, Phase ? and Phase ? clinical trials were conducted in approximately 800 subjects. The third phase of clinical trials saw over 25,000 participants. Since the vaccine is still in its third phase, experts have raised questions on the emergency authorization of the vaccine mainly due to the absence of efficacy data. The All India Drug Action Network, an independent network of several non government organisations on drug policy said that the decision to approve an incompletely studied vaccine raises more questions than answers. However, Krishna Ella, the director of Bharat Biotech has stated that the efficacy data for the vaccine will be provided by February, 2020, immediately after the completion of the Phase three trials.
  2. Zydus Cadila: Zycov D Ahmedabad-based Zydus Cadila has developed ZycoV-D with National Biopharma Mission (NBM) and the Department of Biotechnology, Government of India. It is India's first indigenously developed DNA vaccine candidate against COVID-19 and has received the green signal by the DCGI for conducting the Phase ? trials. Over 1,000 volunteers participated in the Phase ? / ? clinical trials of this vaccine. The interim data shows that the vaccine is safe and immunogenic when three doses were administered intradermally. The third phase of clinical trials will be conducted on 26,000 Indian participants.
  3. Gennova Biopharmaceuticals: mRNA India's first indigenous mRNA vaccine, developed by Pune-based Gennova Pharmaceuticals in collaboration with HDT Biotech Corporation, USA, has received permission from Indian drug regulators to initiate the first two phases of human clinical trials on December 11, 2020.. According to an official statement, the mRNA vaccines are fully synthetic and do not require a host for growth, e.g., eggs or bacteria. This means it can be swiftly manufactured in an inexpensive manner under cGMP (Current Good Manufacturing Practices) conditions to ensure their availability and accessibility for mass vaccinations. The vaccine is stable at 2-8 degrees celsius for two months
  4. Biological E: Antigen Vaccine Hyderabad-based Biological E started its Phase ?/? clinical trials to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity in November 2020 itself. The firm is expected to produce its interim data within the first quarter of this year. This vaccine candidate, which has received seed funding from the Department of Biotechnology, uses an antigen licenced from Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas and an adjuvant (an ingredient used in some vaccines to create a stronger immune response) from Dynavax Technologies Corporation. Potential advantages of this vaccine include scalability and thermostability. This could make it fit for deployment at scale in low-resource settings.
  Non-Indigenous Vaccines 1. Serum Institute of India: COVISHIELD Covishield, developed at the Jenner Institute, University of Oxford in the UK and licenced from British pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca received the Indian government's approval for restricted use of the vaccine on January 3, 2021. The Pune-based Serum Institute uses a non replicating chimpanzee adenovirus as a vector. The vaccine attacks the Spike protein of SARS-Cov-2.
 Oxford-AstraZeneca submitted safety, immunogenicity and efficacy data generated on 23,745 participants aged ³ 18 years or older from overseas clinical studies, showing an overall efficacy of 70.42%. In terms of Indian studies, 1,600 participants took part in the second and third phase of the clinical trials and the data from this trial was found comparable and 'noninferior' to the UK product.
  2. Dr Reddy's Laboratories: Sputnik V Named after the first Soviet space satellite, the Russian vaccine Sputnik V is developed by Gamaleya Institute and Russian Direct Investment Fund. In India, the vaccine is being manufactured at Dr Reddy's Laboratories and has shown 95% efficacy in its interim analysis. The vaccine is currently in its third phase of clinical trial. Sputnik V is the world's first registered vaccine and is rooted on a adenoviral (most common vector used for cancer gene therapy) vector-based platform.
 3. Serum Institute of India: Novavax
 USA-based Novavax which is manufactured by Serum Institute of India is a protein based vaccine which in under consideration by the Indian government for its Phase ? clinical trial. The vaccine is currently in its third phase of clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy, safety and immunogenicity in the USA and Mexico.
 4.Biological E: Johnson & Johnson Adenoviral Vaccine
 Apart from signing up with Baylor College of Medicine for its antigen vaccine, Biological E also entered into an agreement with Johnson & Johnson unit Janssen Pharmaceutica to manufacture its COVID-19 candidate in India. As of December 28, 2020, the vaccine is in its pre-clinical stages.
 The US-based pharmaceutical company Pfizer has not yet turned up for CDSCO's committee meetings to deliberate on the approval process despite applying to the DCGI for permission for emergency use of the vaccine. Besides, Pfizer is yet to generate data from local clinical trials in India and will be relying on data from other countries.
Registration for COVID-19 vaccination for adults over the age of 18 will be open from 4 pm on April 28. Adults over the age of 18 can get COVID-19 vaccines from May 1. Registration can be done through the Co-WIN portal, the Aarogya Setu app or the Umang portal.
 Currently, frontline and healthcare workers and those over the age of 45 are eligible to be vaccinated. Serum Institute of India's Covishield and Bharat Biotech's Covaxin are the two vaccines currently being provided with Russia's Sputnik vaccine applying for approval through Dr Reddy's.The Union Government is providing free vaccines to everyone over 45 and frontline and healthcare workers. However, those between 18 and 45 will have to pay to get vaccinated.The state governments of Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh have announced free of cost vaccination for those above 18.Here's how you can register yourself to get the COVID-19 vaccine via the Co-WIN portal, Aarogya Setu app and the Umang portal.
 Co-WINOn the Co-WIN portal, click on the Register/Sign In yourself option and enter your mobile number and click on the get OTP (One Time Password) option. Click the verify button after entering the OTP which is sent to your phone. 
 In the next page, you will be asked to register by providing details of a photo ID. You can provide your Aadhar card, Driving License, PAN card, Passport, Pension Passbook, NPR Smart Card or Voter ID. You will also be asked to provide your year of birth and gender. You can add four beneficiaries on one mobile number. 
 After clicking on register, the beneficiary would have successfully registered and given an option to schedule their appointment.You schedule an appointment by either entering your pin code or your state and district. 
 The next window will show the eligible hospitals and slots for a week. 
 After choosing a slot, you will get a confirmation message on your mobile.On the vaccination day, remember to carry original photo ID card you provided to register for the vaccine.Aarogya Setu On the Aarogya Setu app, go to the CoWin tab and click on Vaccination.You will be asked to register by providing your phone number and entering an OTP, which will be sent to the given number. 
 After that, you will be asked to provide your name, gender, year of birth as well as a photo ID card. You can provide your Aadhar card, Driving License, PAN card, Passport, Pension Passbook, NPR Smart Card or Voter ID. After registering, you can schedule an appointment by providing your pincode as well the date you prefer to be vaccinated. The Aarogya Setu app further provides you the option of getting a free vaccine or a paid one. 
 Next, a drop down menu will be shown from which you can select a vaccination centre. After choosing one, you will be shown the available slots and timings for the particular date. 
 After choosing a slot, you will get a confirmation message on your mobile.On the day of the vaccination, remember to carry original photo ID card you provided to register for the vaccine.Umang portalAfter logging into your profile on the Umang app or portal, choose the health option in the categories section. 
 The next window will have all the available government health services you can access. Choose the Co-WIN option. 
 Like with the Co-WIN portal and Aarogya Setu app, you will be asked to register by providing your name, gender, year of birth as well as a photo ID card. You can provide your Aadhar card, Driving License, PAN card, Passport, Pension Passbook, NPR Smart Card or Voter ID.Next, you will be asked to select a vaccination centre either by providing your pin code or your state and district. You will also have to select a date. 
 Umang also provides you with the option of choosing which vaccine to take. However, when we tried this option, the app gave us an error message. Since this is not a mandatory field, you have the option not to make a choice.Next, you will be shown the available centres and the slots and timings. Confirm your choice. 
 After choosing a slot, you will get a confirmation message on your mobile.On the day of the vaccination, remember to carry original photo ID card you provided to register for the vaccine.If for some reason you are not able to register or the above tools are facing a technical glitch, you have the option to walk-in at the nearby centre and get vaccinated. However, you may be at a disadvantage if the particular centre decides to prioritise those with appointments to prevent crowds. Registration is recommended though not mandatory. Once you receive the vaccination, kindly ensure you have received an SMS detailing the completion of the dose. If you do not receive the message, raise it with the officials before you exit the vaccination centre. This is important as the vaccination certificate will be a valid document in the future. You can also download the vaccine certificate by signing into your account on the Co-WIN portal.
Mumbai: The top 20 countries with the most COVID-19 cases together have as much population as India, but have 84 times the cases reported and 200 times the deaths in India, said Lav Agarwal, joint secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, on April 28, citing the World Health Organization's (WHO) data. While the claim is true, it fails to mention the fact that these 20 countries have conducted 28 times the tests conducted in India, FactChecker.in analysis reveals. Claim: ÒThe World Health Organization data shows that the combined population of 20 nations where maximum COVID-19 cases have been found is almost the same as IndiaÕs population. Further, these nations have together reported 84 times the number of cases reported in India.Ó ÒIn addition, compared to the 20 nations where maximum COVID-19 cases have been reported, India has reported only 1/200 times [0.5%] the number of deaths as the total number of deaths in these 20 countries.Ó In addition, compared to the 20 nations where maximum #COVID19 cases have been reported, India has reported only 1/200 times the no. of deaths as the total no. of deaths in these 20 countries - @MoHFW_INDIA https://t.co/CQWuvYZ3gx #IndiaFightsCorona https://t.co/eNjUUGlXdjÑ PIB India #StayHome #StaySafe (@PIB_India) April 28, 2020 Fact: Partly true. The population of just one of these 20 countries, China, is more than that of India. So, on that count, AgarwalÕs contention is incorrect. Further, the combined population of the top 20 countries--excluding China--that report the most COVID-19 cases, is 1.35 billion, as much as that of India, according to data from the WHO and the World Bank. The figures cited by the government official comparing India with these countries in terms of cases and deaths reported hold true. However, these 20 countries have conducted over 20 million tests by April 28, which is 28 times the number conducted by India (716,733 tests), as per Our World In Data, an initiative by the University of Oxford. These countries together reported 2,400,663 COVID-19 cases or 86 times those of India (27,892), as on April 27, according to WHOÕs situation report. Likewise, these 20 nations reported 181,435 deaths or 208 times the number of India (872). However, it is important to note that in terms of testing, the United States of America has tested more people than any other country--5 million tests--and also has the highest number of total confirmed cases and COVID-19 deaths in the world, according to the WHO bulletin of April 27. COVID-19: Top 20 Countries And India Countries Confirmed Cases Deaths Population (in millions) Total Testing Tests Per Million United States of America 931698 47980 326 5793162 17770 Spain* 207634 23190 46.7 1,035,522 22174 Italy 197675 26644 60.4 1,846,934 30578 Germany** 155193 5750 82.9 2547052 30724 The United Kingdom 152844 20732 66.4 599339 9026 France 123279 22821 66.9 724574 10831 Turkey 110130 2805 82.3 948,115 11520 Iran (Islamic Republic)*** 90481 5710 81.8 432,329 5285 Russian Federation 87147 794 144.4 3,139,258 21740 Brazil 58509 4016 209.4 339,552 1622 Belgium 46134 7094 11.4 233081 20446 Canada 45778 2489 37 740859 20023 Netherlands 37845 4475 17.2 215169 12510 Switzerland 28978 1336 8.5 264781 31151 Peru 25331 700 31.9 239,563 7510 Portugal 23864 903 10.2 395771 38801 Ecuador 22719 576 17 50961 2998 Ireland 19262 1087 4.8 153,054 31886 Sweden** 18640 2194 10.1 119,200 11802 Saudi Arabia 17522 139 33.6 200,000 5952 Total 2400663 181435 1349 20018276 14839 India 27892 872 1352 716733 530 China 84341 4643 1392 NA 
  Source: Our World In Data, WHO and Indian Council of Medical Research; World Bank; Worldometer
 Note: Testing figures as on April 28; *April 23, **April 26, ***April 27
 Data for Brazil and Saudi Arabia are from Worldometer and are as of April 30 Indian states and union territories that have more testing centres and are testing more samples are reporting higher numbers of confirmed COVID-19 cases, an IndiaSpend analysis of testing and case data from 11 states showed on March 25. We welcome feedback. Please write to respond@indiaspend.org. We reserve the right to edit responses for language and grammar.
nan